

--- PAGE 3 ---
TeamLRN
FOREWORD 
 
 
My acquaintance with the CRC Handbook goes back sixty years, for when 
I was inducted into the wonders of chemistry by an uncle of mine (“Uncle 
Tungsten”)—I was ten—he lent me his copy of the 23rd (1939) edition. This  was 
not pocket-sized, like the earlier editions he had on his shelf, and indeed 
contained over 2200 pages, but these were printed on thin India  paper, and the 
whole book, with its soft red morocco cover, fitted easily in the hand. I fell in love 
with it straightaway—my uncle, seeing this, told me I might keep it—for its tables 
were so full of information that I thought of it as containing the whole universe 
between its covers. I was especially attracted to the Physical Constants of 
Inorganic Compounds, a hundred and fifty densely-packed pages which, through 
constant poring over, I got almost by heart.  
I think I owe the only original idea I had in my chemical boyhood to these 
tables—for, having been struck by the steadily rising melting points and densities 
of the transition metals in Groups IV-VI as one went from Period 3 to 6 (Ti, Zr, 
Hf; V, Nb, Ta; Cr, Mo, W), I was then taken aback to find that the Period 7 
analogues of these broke the series. Thorium had a lower melting point and 
density than hafnium; uranium lower ones than tungsten. Could it be, I wondered, 
that they were not in fact analogues of hafnium and tungsten, not transition metals 
at all, but belonged to an interpolated series which resembled the rare-earth 
metals? To my joy, after the War, I found that this naïf idea of mine, a possibly 
unjustified leap of the imagination, turned out to be true—but it was entirely due 
to poring over the tables of the CRC Handbook that I owed it. 
 
Although my interests later turned more to biology and then medicine, the 
CRC Handbook has never lost its enchantment for me. I got the 30th (1947) and 
the 41st (1959-1960) editions—at this point the Handbook still had its smaller 
format, but had become almost cubical in shape (the 41st edition had nearly 3500 
pages); and then, of course, it morphed into its present, monumental format. 
While I keep the massive recent editions in my study, I keep my original one, the 
23rd edition, on my bedside table, for it is easy to handle (especially when one is 
reading in bed), and was my most cherished gift as a boy. Indeed, one way and 
another, whether reading in bed or in my study, I have always had a Handbook 
near me. While the CRC Handbook is monumental in its scope, a huge, always-
to-be-relied-upon mine of information, it is also a friendly book, a companion 
which has given me joy for the greater part of my life. 
 
Oliver Sacks 
New York 
October 2003 


--- PAGE 4 ---
PREFACE
Since the First Edition of the CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics appeared
in 1913, the size and scope have expanded in step with the growth of scientific knowledge.
It has not only served as a reference source for professionals and students, but has provided
inspiration to many young people as they developed their interest in science. The late
Linus Pauling, in his Foreword to the 74th Edition, wrote "I attribute much of my
knowledge about substances and their properties to my study of the information that the
Handbook provided." In the Foreword to the present edition Oliver Sacks, author of the
best seller Uncle Tungsten: Memories of a Chemical Boyhood, describes the strong
influence the Handbook had on him from the age of ten.
Throughout its history the overall philosophy of the Handbook has been to provide
broad coverage of all types of data commonly encountered by physical scientists and
engineers. While the Internet has spawned numerous large databases covering narrow
areas of science, we feel there is still a need for a concise reference source spanning the
full range of the physical sciences and focusing on key data that are frequently needed by
R&D professionals, engineers, and students. We hope this Internet version of the CRC
Handbook will be a step in continuing to serve these needs.
The 85th Edition includes updates and expansions of several tables, such as
Aqueous Solubility of Organic Compounds, Thermal Conductivity of Liquids, and Table
of the Isotopes. A new table on Azeotropic Data for Binary Mixtures has been added, as
well as tables on Index of Refraction of Inorganic Crystals and Critical Solution
Temperatures of Polymer Solutions. In response to user requests, several topics such as
Coefficient of Friction and Miscibility of Organic Solvents have been restored to the
Handbook. The latest recommended values of the Fundamental Physical Constants,
released in December 2003, are included in this edition. Finally, the Appendix on
Mathematical Tables has been revised by Dr. Daniel Zwillinger, editor of the CRC
Standard Mathematical Tables and Formulae; it includes new information on factorials,
Clebsch-Gordan coefficients, orthogonal polynomials, statistical formulas, and other
topics.
This new Internet edition has added 13 new subsections that can be accessed as
interactive tables. These include tables on atomic and molecular polarizabilities, diffusion
in gases and liquids, vapor pressure and density of mercury, ionic radii in crystals, surface
tension, and other topics. All material in the printed Handbook is accessible in the Internet
version as interactive tables and/or pdf displays.
The Editor appreciates suggestions on new topics for the Handbook and
notification of any errors. Input from users plays a key role in keeping the book up to date.
Address all comments to Editor-in-Chief, Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, CRC Press
LLC, 2000 N. W. Corporate Blvd., Boca Raton, FL 33431. Comments may also be sent by
electronic mail to drlide@post.harvard.edu.


--- PAGE 29 ---
TeamLRN
1-16
INTERNATIONAL TEMPERATURE SCALE OF 1990 (ITS-90) (continued)
Defining Fixed Points of the ITS-90 (continued)
a
e-H2 indicates equilibrium hydrogen, that is, hydrogen with the equilibrium distribution of its ortho and para states. Normal
hydrogen at room temperature contains 25% para hydrogen and 75% ortho hydrogen.
b VP indicates vapor pressure point; CVGT indicates constant volume gas thermometer point; TP indicates triple point
(equilibrium temperature at which the solid, liquid, and vapor phases coexist); FP indicates freezing point, and MP indicates
melting point (the equilibrium temperatures at which the solid and liquid phases coexist under a pressure of 101 325 Pa, one
standard atmosphere). The isotopic composition is that naturally occurring.
c
Previously, these were secondary fixed points.
Values of Coefficients in the Vapor Pressure Equations for Helium
Coef.or
3He
4He
4He
constant
0.65—3.2 K
1.25—2.1768 K
2.1768—5.0 K
A0
1.053 447
1.392 408
3.146 631
A1
0.980 106
0.527 153
1.357 655
A2
0.676 380
0.166 756
0.413 923
A3
0.372 692
0.050 988
0.091 159
A4
0.151 656
0.026 514
0.016 349
A5
–0.002 263
0.001 975
0.001 826
A6
0.006 596
–0.017 976
–0.004 325
A7
0.088 966
0.005 409
–0.004 973
A8
–0.004 770
0.013 259
0
A9
–0.054 943
0
0
B
7.3
5.6
10.3
C
4.3
2.9
1.9


--- PAGE 92 ---
2-29
a
absorption coefficient, acceleration, activity
a0
Bohr radius
A
ampere, adenine (in genetic code)
Å
ångstrom
A
absorbance, area, Helmholtz energy, mass number
AH
Hall coefficient
Ar
atomic weight (relative atomic mass)
AAS
atomic absorption spectroscopy
Abe
abequose
abs
absolute
ac
alternating current
Ac
acetyl
AcOH
acetic acid
ACT
activated complex theory
ACTH
adrenocorticotropic hormone
Ade
adenine
ADP
adenosine diphosphate
ads
adsorption
ae
eon (109 years)
AES
atomic emission spectroscopy,
Auger electron spectroscopy
AF
audio frequency
AFM
atomic force microscopy
AI
artificial intelligence
AIM
atoms in molecules
Al
Alfen number
Ala
alanine
alc
alcohol
aliph.
aliphatic
alk.
alkaline
All
allose
Alt
altrose
am
amorphous solid
Am
amyl
AM
amplitude modulation
AMP
adenosine 5'-monophosphate
amu
atomic mass unit (recommended symbol is u)
anh, anhyd
anhydrous
antilog
antilogarithm
AO
atomic orbital
AOM
angular overlap model
Api
apiose
APS
appearance potential spectroscopy
APW
augmented plane wave
aq
aqueous
Ar
aryl
Ara
arabinose
Ara-ol
arabinitol
Arg
arginine
SCIENTIFIC ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS
This table lists some symbols, abbreviations, and acronyms encountered in the physical sciences.  Most entries in italic type are symbols for
physical quantities; for more details on these, see the table “Symbols and Terminology for Physical and Chemical Quantities” in this section.
Additional information on units may be found in the table “International System of Units” in Section 1. Many of the terms to which these
abbreviations refer are included in the tables “Definitions of Scientific Terms” in Section 2 and “Techniques for Materials Characterization” in
Section 12.
Publication practices vary with regard to the use of capital or lower case letters for many abbreviations.  An effort has been made to follow the
most common practices in this table, but much variation is found in the literature.  Likewise, policies on the use of periods in an abbreviation vary
considerably.  Periods are generally omitted in this table unless they are necessary for clarity.  Periods should never appear in SI units. The SI
prefixes (m, k ,M, etc.) are not listed here, since they should never be used alone, but selected combinations with SI units (e.g., mg, kV, MW) are
included.
Abbreviations are listed in alphabetical order without regard to case.  Entries beginning with Greek letters fall at the end of the table.
as, asym
asymmetrical (as chemical descriptor)
ASCII
American National Standard Code for Information
Interchange
ASE
aromatic stabilization energy
Asn
asparagine
Asp
aspartic acid
at
atomization
atm
standard atmosphere
ATP
adenosine 5'-triphosphate
ATR
attenuated total internal reflection
at.wt.
atomic weight
AU
astronomical unit
av
average
avdp
avoirdupois
b
barn
B
magnetic flux density, second virial coefficient,
susceptance
bar
bar (pressure unit)
bbl
barrel
bcc
body centered cubic
BCS
Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (theory)
BDE
bond dissociation energy
Bé
Baumé
BET
Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (method)
BeV
billion electronvolt
Bhn
Brinell hardness number
Bi
biot
BN
bond number
BNS
nuclear backscattering spectroscopy
BO
bond order, Born-Oppenheimer (approximation)
BOD
biochemical oxygen demand
bp
boiling point
bpy
2,2'-bipyridine
Bq
becquerel
BRE
bond resonance energy
BSSE
basis set superposition error
Btu
British thermal unit
bu
bushel
Bu
butyl
Bz
benzoyl
Bzl
benzyl
c
combustion reaction
c
amount concentration, specific heat, velocity
c0
speed of light in vacuum
C
coulomb, cytosine (in genetic code)
°C
degree Celsius
C
capacitance, heat capacity, number concentration
ca.
approximately
cal
calorie


--- PAGE 96 ---
2-33
MD
molecular dynamics
Me
methyl
MEP
molecular electrostatic potential
MERP
minimum energy reaction path
Mes
mesityl
MESFET
metal-semiconductor field-effect transistor
Met
methionine
meV
millielectronvolt
MeV
megaelectronvolt
MF
molecular formula
mg
milligram
MHD
magnetohydrodynamics
mi
mile
MIM
molecules-in-molecules
min
minimum, minute
MINDO
modified intermediate neglect of differential overlap
MIR
mid-infrared
misc
miscible
MKS
meter-kilogram-second system
MKSA
meter-kilogram-second-ampere system
mL, ml
milliliter
mm
millimeter
MM
molecular mechanics
mmf
magnetomotive force
mmHg
millimeter of mercury
MO
molecular orbital
mol
mole
mol.wt.
molecular weight
mon
monomeric form
MOS
metal-oxide semiconductor
MOSFET
metal-oxide semiconductor field-effect transistor
mp
melting point
MPa
megapascal
MPA
Mulliken population analysis
Mpc
megaparsec
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
mRNA
messenger RNA
ms
millisecond
MS
mass spectroscopy
MSL
mean sea level
Mur
muramic acid
mV
millivolt
mW
milliwatt
MW
megawatt, microwave, molecular weight
Mx
maxwell
n
neutron
n
amount of substance, number density, principal
quantum number, refractive index, normal (in
chemical formulas)
N
newton
N
angular momentum, neutron number
NA
Avogadro constant
NE
density of states
NAA
neutron activation analysis
NAD
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
NADH
reduced NAD
NADP
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
NAO
natural atomic orbital
NBO
natural bond order
nbp
normal boiling point
Neu
neuraminic acid
NEXAFS
near-edge x-ray absorption fine structure
ng
nanogram
NIR
near infrared
nm
nanometer
NMR
nuclear magnetic resonance
NNDO
neglect of nonbonded differential overlap
NO
natural orbital
NOE
nuclear Overhauser effect
NPA
natural population analysis
NQR
nuclear quadrupole resonance
NRA
prompt nuclear reaction analysis
ns
nanosecond
NTP
normal temperature and pressure
Nu
nucleophile
Nu
Nusselt number
o
ortho (as chemical descriptor)
obs, obsd
observed
OD
optical density, outside diameter
Oe
oersted
ORD
optical rotatory dispersion
oz
ounce
p
proton
p
dielectric polarization, electric dipole moment,
momentum, pressure, para (as chemical descriptor)
P
poise
P
power, pressure, probability, sound energy flux
Pa
pascal
PA
proton affinity
PAS
photoacoustic spectroscopy
pc
parsec
PCR
polymerase chain reaction
PD
potential difference
pdl
poundal
pe
probable error
Pe
Péclet number
PES
photoelectron spectroscopy
PET
positron emission tomography
peth
petroleum ether
pf
power factor
pg
picogram
pH
negative log of hydrogen ion concentration
Ph
phenyl
Phe
phenylalanine
pI
isoelectric point
pip
piperidine
pK
negative log of ionization constant
pm
picometer
PMO
perturbational molecular orbital
PNDO
partial neglect of differential overlap
PNRA
prompt nuclear reaction analysis
pol
polymeric form
ppb
parts per billion
ppm
parts per million
PPP
Pariser-Parr-Pople (method)
ppt
parts per thousand, precipitate
Pr
propyl
Pr
Prandtl number
PRDDO
partial retention of diatomic differential overlap
Pro
proline
ps
picosecond
PS
photoelectron spectroscopy
SCIENTIFIC ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS (continued)


--- PAGE 103 ---
TeamLRN
2-40
DEFINITIONS OF SCIENTIFIC TERMS (continued)
Arenes - Monocyclic and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. See aro-
matic compounds. [5]
Aromatic compounds - Compounds whose structure includes a cyclic
delocalized π-electron system. Historical use of the term implies a ring
containing only carbon (e.g., benzene, naphthalene), but it is often
generalized to include heterocyclic structures such as pyridine and
thiophene. [5]
Arrhenius equation - A key equation in chemical kinetics which ex-
presses the rate constant k as k = Aexp(-Ea/RT), where Ea is the
activation energy, R the molar gas constant, and T the temperature. A
is called the preexponential factor and, for simple gas phase reactions,
may be identified with the collision frequency.
Arsines - AsH3 and compounds derived from it by substituting one, two
or three hydrogen atoms by hydrocarbyl groups. RAsH2, R2AsH,
R3As (R not equal to H) are called primary, secondary and tertiary
arsines, respectively. [5]
Aryl groups - Groups derived from arenes by removal of a hydrogen atom
from a ring carbon atom. Groups similarly derived from heteroarenes
are sometimes subsumed in this definition. [5]
Astronomical unit (AU)* - The mean distance of the earth from the sun,
equal to 1.49597870 × 1011 m.
Atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) - See Techniques for Materials
Characterization, page 12-1.
Atomic emission spectroscopy (AES) - See Techniques for Materials
Characterization, page 12-1.
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) - See Techniques for Materials Char-
acterization, page 12-1.
Atomic mass* - The mass of a nuclide, normally expressed in unified
atomic mass units (u).
Atomic mass unit (u)* - A unit of mass used in atomic, molecular, and
nuclear science, defined as the mass of one atom of 12C divided by 12.
Its approximate value is 1.66054 × 10-27 kg. Also called the unified
atomic mass unit. [1]
Atomic number (Z) - A characteristic property of an element, equal to the
number of protons in the nucleus.
Atomic weight (Ar)* - The ratio of the average mass per atom of an
element to 1/12 of the mass of nuclide 12C. An atomic weight can be
defined for a sample of any given isotopic composition. The standard
atomic weight refers to a sample of normal terrestrial isotopic compo-
sition. The term relative atomic mass is synonymous with atomic
weight. [2]
Attenuated total reflection (ATR) - See Techniques for Materials
Characterization, page 12-1.
Auger effect - An atomic process in which an electron from a higher
energy level fills a vacancy in an inner shell, transferring the released
energy to another electron which is ejected.
Aurora - An atmospheric phenomenon in which streamers of light are
produced when electrons from the sun are guided into the thermo-
sphere by the earth’s magnetic field. It occurs in the polar regions at
altitudes of 95—300 km.
Avogadro constant (NA)* - The number of elementary entities in one
mole of a substance.
Azeotrope - A liquid mixture in a state where the variation of vapor
pressure with composition at constant temperature (or, alternatively,
the variation of normal boiling point with composition) shows either
a maximum or a minimum. Thus when an azeotrope boils the vapor has
the same composition as the liquid.
Azides - Compounds bearing the group -N3, viz. -N=N+=N-; usually
attached to carbon, e.g. PhN3, phenyl azide or azidobenzene. Also used
for salts of hydrazoic acid, HN3, e.g. NaN3, sodium azide. [5]
Azines - Condensation products, R2C=NN=CR2 , of two moles of a
carbonyl compound with one mole of hydrazine. [5]
Azo compounds - Derivatives of diazene (diimide), HN=NH, wherein
both hydrogens are substituted by hydrocarbyl groups, e.g., PhN=NPh,
azobenzene or diphenyldiazene. [5]
Balmer series - The series of lines in the spectrum of the hydrogen atom
which corresponds to transitions between the state with principal
quantum number n = 2 and successive higher states. The wavelengths
are given by 1/λ = RH(1/4 - 1/n2), where n = 3,4,... and RH is the Rydberg
constant for hydrogen. The first member of the series (n = 2 1 3),
which is often called the Hα line, falls at a wavelength of 6563 Å.
Bar (bar) - A unit of pressure equal to 105 Pa.´
Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory - A theory of superconduc-
tivity which is based upon the formation of electron pairs as a result of
an electron-lattice interaction. The theory relates the superconducting
transition temperature to the density of states and the Debye tempera-
ture.
Barn (b) - A unit used for expressing cross sections of nuclear processes,
equal to 10-28 m2.
Barrel - A unit of volume equal to 158.9873 L.
Baryon - Any elementary particle built up from three quarks. Examples
are the proton, neutron, and various short-lived hyperons. Baryons
have odd half-integer spins.
Base - Historically, a substance that yields an OH- ion when it dissociates
in solution, resulting in a pH>7. In the Brönsted definition, a base is a
substance capable of accepting a proton in any type of reaction. The
more general definition, due to G.N. Lewis, classifies any chemical
species capable of donating an electron pair as a base.
Becquerel (Bq)* - The SI unit of radioactivity (disintegrations per unit
time), equal to s-1. [1]
Beer’s law - An approximate expression for the change in intensity of a
light beam that passes through an absorbing medium, viz., log(I/I0) =
-εcl, where I0 is the incident intensity, I is the final intensity, ε is the
molar (decadic) absorption coefficient, c is the molar concentration of
the absorbing substance, and l is the path length. Also called the Beer-
Lambert law
Binding energy* - A generic term for the energy required to decompose
a system into two or more of its constituent parts. In nuclear physics,
the binding energy is the energy difference between a nucleus and the
separated nucleons of which it is composed (the energy equivalent of
the mass defect). In atomic physics, it is the energy required to remove
an electron from an atom.
Biot (Bi) - A name sometimes used for the unit of current in the emu
system.
Birefringence - A property of certain crystals in which two refracted rays
result from a single incident light ray. One, the ordinary ray, follows
the normal laws of refraction, while the other, the extraordinary ray,
exhibits a variable refractive index  which depends on the direction in
the crystal.
Black body radiation* - The radiation emitted by a perfect black body,
i.e., a body which absorbs all radiation incident on it and reflects none.
The wavelength dependence of the radiated energy density ρ (energy
per unit volume per unit wavelength range) is given by the Planck
formula
where λ is the wavelength, h is Planck’s constant, c is the speed of light,
k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature.
Black hole - A very dense object, formed in a supernova explosion, whose
gravitational field is so large that no matter or radiation can escape
from the object.
Bloch wave function - A solution of the Schrödinger equation for an
electron moving in a spatially periodic potential; used in the band
theory of solids.
Bohr magneton (µB)* - The atomic unit of magnetic moment, defined as
ρ
π
λ
λ
=
(
)
8
1
5
hc
hc
kT
e
/
–


--- PAGE 104 ---
2-41
DEFINITIONS OF SCIENTIFIC TERMS (continued)
eh/4πme, where h is Planck’s constant, me the electron mass, and e the
elementary charge. It is the moment associated with a single electron
spin.
Bohr, bohr radius (a0)* - The radius of the lowest orbit in the Bohr model
of the hydrogen atom, defined as εoh2/πmee2, where εo is the permit-
tivity of a vacuum, h is Planck’s constant, me the electron mass, and e
the elementary charge.  It is customarily taken as the unit of length
when using atomic units.
Boiling point - The temperature at which the liquid and gas phases of a
substance are in equilibrium at a specified pressure. The normal
boiling point is the boiling point at normal atmospheric pressure
(101.325 kPa).
Boltzmann constant (k)* - The molar gas constant R divided by
Avogadro’s constant.
Boltzmann distribution - An expression for the equilibrium distribution
of molecules as a function of their energy, in which the number of
molecules in a state of energy E is proportional to exp(-E/kT), where
k is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature.
Bond strength - See Dissociation energy.
Born-Haber cycle* - A thermodynamic cycle in which a crystalline solid
is converted to gaseous ions and then reconverted to the solid. The
cycle permits calculation of the lattice energy of the crystal.
Bose-Einstein distribution - A modification of the Boltzmann distribu-
tion which applies to a system of particles that are bosons. The number
of particles of energy E is proportional to [e(E-µ)/kT-1]-1 , where µ is a
normalization constant, k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the
temperature.
Boson - A particle that obeys Bose-Einstein Statistics; specifically, any
particle with spin equal to zero or an integer. This includes the photon,
pion, deuteron, and all nuclei of even mass number.
Boyle’s law - The empirical law, exact only for an ideal gas, which states
that the volume of a gas is inversely proportional to its pressure at
constant temperature.
Bragg angle (θ) - Defined by the equation nλ = 2dsinθ, which relates the
angle θ between a crystal plane and the diffracted x-ray beam, the
wavelength λ of the x-rays, the crystal plane spacing d, and the
diffraction order n (any integer).
Bravais lattices* - The 14 distinct crystal lattices that can exist in three
dimensions. They include three in the cubic crystal system, two in the
tetragonal, four in the orthorhombic, two in the monoclinic, and one
each in the triclinic, hexagonal, and trigonal systems.
Breakdown voltage - The potential difference at which an insulating
substance undergoes a physical or chemical change that causes it to
become a conductor, thus allowing current to flow through the sample.
Bremsstrahlung - Electromagnetic radiation generated when the veloc-
ity of a charged particle is reduced (literally, “braking radiation”). An
example is the x-ray continuum resulting from collisions of electrons
with the target in an x-ray tube.
Brewster angle - The angle of incidence for which the maximum degree
of plane polarization occurs when a beam of unpolarized light is
incident on the surface of a medium of refractive index n. At this angle,
the angle between the reflected and refracted beams is 90°. The value
of the Brewster angle is tan-1n.
Brillouin scattering - The scattering of light by acoustic phonons in a
solid or liquid.
Brillouin zone - A region of allowed wave vectors and energy levels in
a crystalline solid, which plays a part in the propagation of waves
through the lattice.
British thermal unit (Btu) - A non-SI unit of energy, equal to approxi-
mately 1055 J. Several values of the Btu, defined in slightly different
ways, have been used.
Brownian motion - The random movements of small particles suspended
in a fluid, which arise from collisions with the fluid molecules.
Brunauer-Emmett-Teller method (BET) - See Techniques for Materi-
als Characterization, page 12-1.
Buffer* - A solution designed to maintain a constant pH when small
amounts of a strong acid or base are added. Buffers usually consist of
a fairly weak acid and its salt with a strong base. Suitable concentra-
tions are chosen so that the pH of the solution remains close to the pKa
of the weak acid.
Calorie (cal) - A non-SI unit of energy, originally defined as the heat
required to raise the temperature of 1 g of water by 1°C. Several
calories of slightly different values have been used. The thermochemi-
cal calorie is now defined as 4.184 J.
Candela (cd)* - The SI base unit of luminous intensity. [1]
Capacitance (C) - Ratio of the charge acquired by a body to the change
in potential. [1]
Carbamates - Salts or esters of carbamic acid, H2NC(=O)OH, or of N-
substituted carbamic acids: R2NC(=O)OR′, (R′ = hydrocarbyl or a
cation). The esters are often called urethanes or urethans, a usage that
is strictly correct only for the ethyl esters. [5]
Carbenes - The electrically neutral species H2C: and its derivatives, in
which the carbon is covalently bonded to two univalent groups of any
kind or a divalent group and bears two nonbonding electrons, which
may be spin-paired (singlet state) or spin-non-paired (triplet state). [5]
Carbinols - An obsolete term for substituted methanols, in which the
name carbinol is synonymous with methanol. [5]
Carbohydrates - Originally, compounds such as aldoses and ketoses,
having the stoichiometric formula Cn(H2O)n (hence “hydrates of
carbon”). The generic term carbohydrate now includes mono-,
oligo-, and polysaccharides, as well as their reaction products and
derivatives. [5]
Carboranes - A contraction of carbaboranes. Compounds in which a
boron atom in a polyboron hydride is replaced by a carbon atom with
maintenance of the skeletal structure. [5]
Carboxylic acids - Oxoacids having the structure RC(=O)OH. The term
is used as a suffix in systematic name formation to denote the
-C(=O)OH group including its carbon atom. [5]
Carnot cycle - A sequence of reversible changes in a heat engine using
a perfect gas as the working substance, which is used to demonstrate
that entropy is a state function. The Carnot cycle also provides a means
to calculate the efficiency of a heat engine.
Catalyst - A substance that participates in a particular chemical reaction
and thereby increases its rate but without a net change in the amount
of that substance in the system. [3]
Catenanes, catena compounds - Hydrocarbons having two or more
rings connected in the manner of links of a chain, without a covalent
bond. More generally, the class catena compounds embraces func-
tional derivatives and hetero analogues. [5]
Cation - A positively charged atomic or molecular particle.
Centipoise (cP) - A common non-SI unit of viscosity, equal to mPa s.
Centrifugal distortion - An effect in molecular spectroscopy in which
rotational levels are lowered in energy, relative to the values of a rigid
rotor, as the rotational angular momentum increases. The effect may
be understood classically as a stretching of the bonds in the molecule
as it rotates faster, thus increasing the moment of inertia.
Ceramic - A nonmetallic material of very high melting point.
Cerenkov radiation - Light emitted when a beam of charged particles
travels through a medium at a speed greater than the speed of light in
the medium. It is typically blue in color.
Cgs system of units - A system of units based upon the centimeter, gram,
and second. The cgs system has been supplanted by the International
System (SI).
Chalcogens - The Group VIA elements (oxygen, sulfur, selenium,
tellurium, and polonium). Compounds of these elements are called
chalcogenides. [7]


--- PAGE 105 ---
TeamLRN
2-42
DEFINITIONS OF SCIENTIFIC TERMS (continued)
Chaotic system - A complex system whose behavior is governed by
deterministic laws but whose evolution can vary drastically when
small changes are made in the initial conditions.
Charge - See Electric charge.
Charles’ law - The empirical law, exact only for an ideal gas, which states
that the volume of a gas is directly proportional to its temperature at
constant pressure.
Charm - A quantum number introduced in particle physics to account for
certain properties of elementary particles and their reactions.
Chelate - A compound characterized by the presence of bonds from two
or more bonding sites within the same ligand to a central metal atom.
[3]
Chemical potential - For a mixture of substances, the chemical potential
of constituent B is defined as the partial derivative of the Gibbs energy
G with respect to the amount (number of moles) of B, with tempera-
ture, pressure, and amounts of all other constituents held constant.
Also called partial molar Gibbs energy. [2]
Chemical shift* - A small change in the energy levels (and hence in the
spectra associated with these levels) resulting from the effects of
chemical binding in a molecule. The term is used in fields such as
NMR, Mössbauer, and photoelectron spectroscopy, where the energy
levels are determined primarily by nuclear or atomic effects.
Chiral molecule - A molecule which cannot be superimposed on its
mirror image. A common example is an organic molecule containing
a carbon atom to which four different atoms or groups are attached.
Such molecules exhibit optical activity, i.e., they rotate the plane of a
polarized light beam.
Chlorocarbons - Compounds consisting solely of chlorine and carbon.
[5]
Chromatography* - A method for separation of the components of a
sample in which the components are distributed between two phases,
one of which is stationary while the other moves. In gas chromatogra-
phy the gas moves over a liquid or solid stationary phase. In liquid
chromatography the liquid mixture moves through another liquid, a
solid, or a gel. The mechanism of separation of components may be
adsorption, differential solubility, ion-exchange, permeation, or other
mechanisms. [6]
Clapeyron equation - A relation between pressure and temperature of
two phases of a pure substance that are in equilibrium, viz., dp/dT =
∆trsS/∆trs V, where ∆trs S is the difference in entropy between the phases
and ∆trsV the corresponding difference in volume.
Clathrates - Inclusion compounds in which the guest molecule is in a
cage formed by the host molecule or by a lattice of host molecules. [5]
Clausius (Cl) - A non-SI unit of entropy or heat capacity defined as
cal/K = 4.184 J/K. [2]
Clausius-Clapeyron equation - An approximation to the Clapeyron
equation applicable to liquid-gas and solid-gas equilibrium, in which
one assumes an ideal gas with volume much greater than the con-
densed phase volume. For the liquid-gas case, it takes the form d(lnp)/
dT = ∆vap H/RT2, where R is the molar gas constant and ∆vap H is the
molar enthalpy of vaporization. For the solid-gas case, ∆vap H is
replaced by the molar enthalpy of sublimation, ∆sub H.
Clausius-Mosotti equation - A relation between the dielectric constant
εr at optical frequencies and the polarizability α:
where ρ is density, NA is Avogadro’s number, M is molar mass, and ε0
is the permittivity of a vacuum.
Clebsch-Gordon coefficients - A set of coefficients used to describe the
vector coupling of angular momenta in atomic and nuclear physics.
Codon - A set of three bases, chosen from the four primary bases found
in the DNA molecule (uracil, cytosine, adenine, and guanine), which
specifies the production of a particular amino acid or carries some
other genetic instruction. For example, the codon UCA specifies the
amino acid serine, CAG specifies glutamine, etc. There are a total of
64 codons.
Coercive force - The magnetizing force at which the magnetic flux
density is equal to zero. [10]
Coercivity* - The maximum value of coercive force that can be attained
when a magnetic material is symmetrically magnetized to saturation
induction. [10]
Coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy (CARS) - See Techniques
for Materials Characterization, page 12-1.
Colloid - Molecules or polymolecular particles dispersed in a medium
that have, at least in one direction, a dimension roughly between 1 nm
and 1 µm. [3]
Color center - A defect in a crystal that gives rise to optical absorption,
thus changing the color of the material. A common type is the F-center,
which results when an electron occupies the site of a negative ion.
Compressibility (κ)* - The fractional change of volume as pressure is
increased, viz., κ = -(1/V)(dV/dp). [1]
Compton wavelength (λC)* - In the scattering of electromagnetic
radiation by a free particle (e.g., electron, proton), λC = h/mc is the
increase in wavelength, at a 90° scattering angle, corresponding to the
transfer of energy from radiation to particle. Here h is Planck’s
constant, c the speed of light, and m the mass of the particle.
Conductance (G)* - For direct current, the reciprocal of resistance. More
generally, the real part of admittance. [1]
Conductivity, electrical (σ)* - The reciprocal of the resistivity. [1]
Conductivity, thermal -  See Thermal conductivity.
Congruent transformation - A phase transition (melting, vaporization,
etc.) in which the substance preserves its exact chemical composition.
Constitutional repeating unit (CRU) - In polymer science, the smallest
constitutional unit, the repetition of which constitutes a regular mac-
romolecule, i.e., a macromolecule with all units connected identically
with respect to directional sense. [8]
Copolymer - A polymer derived from more than one species of monomer.
[8]
Coriolis effect - The deviation from simple trajectories when a mechani-
cal system is described in a rotating coordinate system. It affects the
motion of projectiles on the earth and in molecular spectroscopy leads
to an important interaction between the rotational and vibrational
motions. The effect may be described by an additional term in the
equations of motion, called the Coriolis force.
Cosmic rays* - High energy nuclear particles, electrons, and photons,
originating mostly outside the solar system, which continually bom-
bard the earth’s atmosphere.
Coulomb (C)* - The SI unit of electric charge, equal to A s. [1]
Coulomb’s law - The statement that the force F between two electrical
charges q1 and q2 separated by a distance r is F = (4πε0)-1q1q2/r2, where
ε0 is the permittivity of a vacuum.
Covalent bond - A chemical bond between two atoms whose stability
results from the sharing of two electrons, one from each atom.
Cowling number (Co) - A dimensionless quantity used in plasma
physics, defined by Co = B2/µρv2, where ρ is density, v is velocity, µ
is permeability, and B is magnetic flux density. [2]
CPT theorem - A theorem in particle physics which states that any local
Lagrangian theory that is invariant under proper Lorentz transforma-
tions is also invariant under the combined operations of charge
conjugation, C, space inversion, P, and time reversal, T, taken in any
order.
Critical point* - In general, the point on the phase diagram of a two-phase
system at which the two coexisting phases have identical properties
ε
ε
ρ
α
ε
r
r
A
–1
2
3
0
+
=
N
M


--- PAGE 106 ---
2-43
DEFINITIONS OF SCIENTIFIC TERMS (continued)
and therefore represent a single phase. At the liquid-gas critical point
of a pure substance, the distinction between liquid and gas vanishes,
and the vapor pressure curve ends. The coordinates of this point are
called the critical temperature and critical pressure. Above the critical
temperature, it is not possible to liquefy the substance.
Cross section (σ)* - A measure of the probability of collision (or other
interaction) between a beam of particles and a target which it encoun-
ters. In rough terms it is the effective area the target particles present
to the incident ones; however, the precise definition depends on the
nature of the interaction. A general definition of σ is the number of
encounters per unit time divided by nv, where n is the concentration of
incident particles and v their velocity.
Crosslink - In polymer science, a small region in a macromolecule from
which at least four chains emanate, and formed by reactions involving
sites or groups on existing macromolecules or by interactions between
existing macromolecules. [8]
Crown compounds - Macrocyclic polydentate compounds, usually
uncharged, in which three or more coordinating ring atoms (usually
oxygen or nitrogen) are or may become suitably close for easy
formation of chelate complexes with metal ions or other cationic
species. [5]
Crust* - The outer layer of the solid earth, above the Mohorovicic
discontinuity. Its thickness averages about 35 km on the continents and
about 7 km below the ocean floor.
Cryoscopic constant (Ef)* - The constant that expresses the amount by
which the freezing point Tf of a solvent is lowered by a non-dissociat-
ing solute, through the relation ∆Tf = Ef m, where m is the molality of
the solute.
Curie (Ci) - A non-SI unit of radioactivity (disintegrations per unit time),
equal to 3.7 × 1010 s-1.
Curie temperature (TC)* - For a ferromagnetic material, the critical
temperature above which the material becomes paramagnetic. Also
applied to the temperature at which the spontaneous polarization
disappears in a ferroelectric solid. [1]
Cyanohydrins - Alcohols substituted by a cyano group, most commonly,
but not limited to, examples having a CN and an OH group attached to
the same carbon atom. They are formally derived from aldehydes or
ketones by the addition of hydrogen cyanide. [5]
Cycloalkanes - Saturated monocyclic hydrocarbons (with or without side
chains). See alicyclic compounds. Unsaturated monocyclic hydrocar-
bons having one endocyclic double or one triple bond are called
cycloalkenes and cycloalkynes, respectively. [5]
Cyclotron resonance - The resonant absorption of energy from a system
in which electrons or ions that are orbiting in a uniform magnetic field
are subjected to radiofrequency or microwave radiation. The reso-
nance frequency is given by ν = eH/2πm*c, where e is the elementary
charge, H is the magnetic field strength, m* is the effective mass of the
charged particle, and c is the speed of light. The effect occurs in both
solids (involving electrons or holes) and in low pressure gasses
(involving ions)
Dalton (Da) - A name sometimes used in biochemistry for the unified
atomic mass unit (u).
De Broglie wavelength - The wavelength associated with the wave
representation of a moving particle, given by h/mv, where h is Planck’s
constant, m the particle mass, and v the velocity.
De Haas-Van Alphen effect - An effect observed in certain metals and
semiconductors at low temperatures and high magnetic fields, charac-
terized by a periodic variation of magnetic susceptibility with field
strength.
Debye equation* - The relation between the relative permittivity (dielec-
tric constant) εr, polarizability α, and permanent dipole moment µ in
a dielectric material whose molecules are free to rotate. It takes the
form
where ρ is density, NA is Avogadro’s number, M is molar mass, and ε0
is the permittivity of a vacuum.
Debye length - In the Debye-Hückel theory of ionic solutions, the
effective thickness of the cloud of ions of opposite charge which
surrounds each given ion and shields the Coulomb potential produced
by that ion.
Debye temperature (θD)* - In the Debye model of the heat capacity of
a crystalline solid, θD = hνD/k, where h is Planck’s constant, k is the
Boltzmann constant, and νD is the maximum vibrational frequency the
crystal can support. For T << θD, the heat capacity is proportional to
T3.
Debye unit (D) - A non-SI unit of electric dipole moment used in
molecular physics, equal to 3.335641 × 10-30 C m.
Debye-Waller factor (D) - The factor by which the intensity of a
diffraction line is reduced because of lattice vibrations. [1]
Defect - Any departure from the regular structure of a crystal lattice. A
Frenkel defect results when an atom or ion moves to an interstitial
position and leaves behind a vacancy. A Schottky defect involves
either a vacancy where the atom has moved to the surface or a structure
where a surface atom has moved to an interstitial position.
Degree of polymerization - The number of monomeric units in a
macromolecule or an oligomer molecule. [8]
Dendrite - A tree-like crystalline pattern often observed, for example, in
ice crystals and alloys in which the crystal growth branches repeatedly.
Density (ρ)* - In the most common usage, mass density or mass per unit
volume. More generally, the amount of some quantity (mass, charge,
energy, etc.) divided by a length, area, or volume.
Density of states (NE, ρ) - The number of one-electron states in an
infinitesimal interval of energy, divided by the range of that interval
and by volume. [1]
Dew point* - The temperature at which liquid begins to condense as the
temperature of a gas mixture is lowered. In meteorology, it is the
temperature at which moisture begins to condense on a surface in
contact with the air.
Diamagnetism - A type of magnetism characterized by a negative
magnetic susceptibility, so that the material, when placed in an
external magnetic field, becomes weakly magnetized in the direction
opposite to the field. This magnetization is independent of tempera-
ture.
Diazo compounds - Compounds having the divalent diazo group,
=N+=N-, attached to a carbon atom, e.g., CH2=N2 diazomethane.
[5]
Dielectric constant (ε)* - Ratio of the electric displacement in a medium
to the electric field strength. Also called permittivity. [1]
Dienes - Compounds that contain two fixed double bonds (usually
assumed to be between carbon atoms). Dienes in which the two
double-bond units are linked by one single bond are termed conju-
gated. [5]
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) - See Techniques for Materi-
als Characterization, page 12-1.
Differential thermal analysis (DTA) - See Techniques for Materials
Characterization, page 12-1.
Diffusion* - The migration of atoms, molecules, ions, or other particles
as a result of some type of gradient (concentration, temperature, etc.).
Diopter - A unit used in optics, formally equal to m-1. It is used in
expressing dioptic power, which is the reciprocal of the focal length of
a lens.
Dipole moment, electric (p,µ)* - For a distribution of equal positive and
ε
ε
ρ
ε
α
µ
r
r
A
3
–1
2
3
0
2
+
=
+




N
M
kT


--- PAGE 107 ---
TeamLRN
2-44
DEFINITIONS OF SCIENTIFIC TERMS (continued)
negative charge, the magnitude of the dipole moment vector is the
positive charge multiplied by the distance between the centers of
positive and negative charge distribution. The direction is given by the
line from the center of negative charge to the center of positive charge.
Dipole moment, magnetic (m,µ) - Formally defined in electromagnetic
theory as a vector quantity whose vector product with the magnetic
flux density equals the torque. The magnetic dipole generated by a
current I flowing in a small loop of area A has a magnetic moment of
magnitude IA. In atomic and nuclear physics, a magnetic moment is
associated with the angular momentum of a particle; e.g., an electron
with orbital angular momentum l exhibits a magnetic moment of -el/
2me where e is the elementary charge and me the mass of the electron.
[1]
Disaccharides - Compounds in which two monosaccharides are joined
by a glycosidic bond. [5]
Dislocation - An extended displacement of a crystal from a regular lattice.
An edge dislocation results when one portion of the crystal has
partially slipped with respect to the other, resulting in an extra plane
of atoms extending through part of the crystal. A screw dislocation
transforms successive atomic planes into the surface of a helix.
Dispersion - Splitting of a beam of light (or other electromagnetic
radiation) of mixed wavelengths into the constituent wavelengths as a
result of the variation of refractive index of the medium with wave-
length.
Dissociation constant* - The equilibrium constant for a chemical reac-
tion in which a compound dissociates into its constituent parts.
Dissociation energy (De)* - For a diatomic molecule, the difference
between the energies of the free atoms at rest and the minimum in the
potential energy curve. The term bond dissociation energy (D0), which
can be applied to polyatomic molecules as well, is used for the
difference between the energies of the fragments resulting when a
bond is broken and the energy of the original molecule in its lowest
energy state. The term bond strength implies differences in enthalpy
rather than energy.
Domain - A small region of a solid in which the magnetic or electric
moments of the individual units (atoms, molecules, or ions) are aligned
in the same direction.
Domain wall - The transition region between adjacent ferromagnetic
domains, generally a layer with a thickness of a few hundred ångström
units. Also called Bloch wall.
Doppler effect - The change in the apparent frequency of a wave (sound,
light, or other) when the source of the wave is moving relative to the
observer.
Dose equivalent (H) - The product of the absorbed dose of radiation at a
point of interest in tissue and various modifying factors which depend
on the type of tissue and radiation. [1]
Drift velocity - The velocity of charge carriers (electrons, ions, etc.)
moving under the influence of an electric field in a medium which
subjects the carriers to some frictional force.
Dyne (dyn) - A non-SI (cgs) unit of force, equal to 10-5 N.
Ebullioscopic constant (Eb)* - The constant that expresses the amount
by which the boiling point Tb of a solvent is raised by a non-
dissociating solute, through the relation ∆Tb = Eb m, where m is the
molality of the solute.
Eddy currents - Circulating currents set up in conducting bulk materials
or sheets by varying magnetic fields.
Effinghausen effect - The appearance of a temperature gradient in a
current carrying conductor that is placed in a transverse magnetic field.
The direction of the gradient is perpendicular to the current and the
field.
Eigenvalue - An allowed value of the constant a in the equation Au = au,
where A is an operator acting on a function u (which is called an
eigenfunction). In quantum mechanics, the outcome of any observa-
tion is an eigenvalue of the corresponding operator. Also called
characteristic value.
Einstein - A non-SI unit used in photochemistry, equal to one mole of
photons.
Einstein temperature (θV) - In the Einstein theory of the heat capacity
of a crystalline solid, θV = hν/k, where h is Planck’s constant, k is the
Boltzmann constant, and ν is the vibrational frequency of the crystal.
Einstein transition probability - A constant in the Einstein relation Aij
+ Bijρ for the probability of a transition between two energy levels i and
j in a radiation field of energy density ρ. The Aij coefficient describes
the probability of spontaneous emission, while Bij and Bji govern the
probability of stimulated emission and absorption, respectively (Bij =
Bji).
Elastic limit - The greatest stress which a material is capable of sustaining
without any permanent strain remaining after complete release of the
stress. [10]
Elastic modulus - See Young’s modulus.
Electric charge (Q) - The quantity of electricity; i.e., the property that
controls interactions between bodies through electrical forces.
Electric current (I) - The charge passing through a circuit per unit time.
[1]
Electric displacement (D) - A vector quantity whose magnitude equals
the electric field strength multiplied by the permittivity of the medium
and whose direction is the same as that of the field strength.
Electric field strength (E) - The force exerted by an electric field on a
point charge divided by the electric charge. [1]
Electric potential (V) - A scalar quantity whose gradient is equal to the
negative of the electric field strength.
Electrical conductance - See Conductance
Electrical resistance - See Resistance
Electrical resistivity - See Resistivity.
Electrochemical series* - An arrangement of reactions which produce or
consume electrons in an order based on standard electrode potentials.
A common arrangement places metals in decreasing order of their
tendency to give up electrons.
Electrode potential* - The electromotive force of a cell in which the
electrode on the left is the standard hydrogen electrode and that on the
right is the electrode in question. [2]
Electrolysis - The decomposition of a substance as a result of passing an
electric current between two electrodes immersed in the sample.
Electromotive force (emf) - The energy supplied by a source divided by
the charge transported through the source. [1]
Electron* - An elementary particle in the family of leptons, with negative
charge and spin of 1/2.
Electron affinity* - The energy difference between the ground state of a
gas-phase atom or molecule and the lowest state of the corresponding
negative ion.
Electron cyclotron resonance (ECR) - See Techniques for Materials
Characterization, page 12-1.
Electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) - See Techniques for Mate-
rials Characterization, page 12-1.
Electron nuclear double resonance (ENDOR) - See Techniques for
Materials Characterization, page 12-1.
Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) - See Techniques for Materi-
als Characterization, page 12-1.
Electron probe microanalysis (EPMA) - See Techniques for Materials
Characterization, page 12-1.
Electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis (ESCA) - See Techniques
for Materials Characterization, page 12-1.
Electron spin (s) - The quantum number, equal to 1/2, that specifies the
intrinsic angular momentum of the electron.


--- PAGE 108 ---
2-45
DEFINITIONS OF SCIENTIFIC TERMS (continued)
Electron stimulated desorption (ESD) - See Techniques for Materials
Characterization, page 12-1.
Electron volt (eV)* - A non-SI unit of energy used in atomic and nuclear
physics, equal to approximately 1.602177 × 10-19 J. The electron volt
is defined as the kinetic energy acquired by an electron upon accelera-
tion through a potential difference of 1 V. [1]
Electronegativity* - A parameter originally introduced by Pauling
which describes, on a relative basis, the power of an atom or group of
atoms to attract electrons from the same molecular entity. [3]
Electrophoresis - The motion of macromolecules or colloidal particles in
an electric field. [3]
Emissivity (ε)* - Ratio of the radiant flux emitted per unit area to that of
an ideal black body at the same temperature. Also called emittance. [1]
Emu - The electromagnetic system of units, based upon the cm, g, and s
plus the emu of current (sometimes called the abampere).
Enantiomers - A chiral molecule and its non-superposable mirror image.
The two forms rotate the plane of polarized light by equal amounts in
opposite directions. Also called optical isomers.
Energy (E,U)* - The characteristic of a system that enables it to do work.
Energy gap* - In the theory of solids, the region between two energy
bands, in which no bound states can occur.
Enols, alkenols - The term refers specifically to vinylic alcohols, which
have the structure HOCR′=CR2. Enols are tautomeric with aldehydes
(R′ = H) or ketones (R′ not equal to H). [5]
Enthalpy (H)* - A thermodynamic function, especially useful when
dealing with constant-pressure processes, defined by H = E + PV,
where E is energy, P pressure, and V volume. [1]
Enthalpy of combustion* - The enthalpy change in a combustion
reaction. Its negative is the heat released in combustion.
Enthalpy of formation, standard* - The enthalpy change for the
reaction in which a substance is formed from its constituent elements,
each in its standard reference state (normally refers to 1 mol, some-
times to 1 g, of the substance).
Enthalpy of fusion* - The enthalpy change in the transition from solid to
liquid state.
Enthalpy of sublimation - The enthalpy change in the transition from
solid to gas state.
Enthalpy of vaporization* - The enthalpy change in the transition from
liquid to gas state.
Entropy (S)* - A thermodynamic function defined such that when a small
quantity of heat dQ is received by a system at temperature T, the
entropy of the system is increased by dQ/T, provided that no irrevers-
ible change takes place in the system. [1]
Entropy unit (e.u.) - A non-SI unit of entropy, equal to 4.184 J/K mol.
Ephemeris time - Time measured in tropical years from January 1, 1900.
Epoxy compounds - Compounds in which an oxygen atom is directly
attached to two adjacent or non-adjacent carbon atoms of a carbon
chain or ring system; thus cyclic ethers. [5]
Equation of continuity - Any of a class of equations that express the fact
that some quantity (mass, charge, energy, etc.) cannot be created or
destroyed. Such equations typically specify that the rate of increase of
the quantity in a given region of space equals the net current of the
quantity flowing into the region.
Equation of state* - An equation relating the pressure, volume, and
temperature of a substance or system.
Equilibrium constant (K)* - For a chemical reaction aA + bB 1 cC
+ dD, the equilibrium constant is defined by:
where ai is the activity of component i. To a certain approximation, the
activities can be replaced by concentrations. The equilibrium constant
is related to ∆rG°, the standard Gibbs energy change in the reaction, by
RT lnK = -∆rG°.
Equivalent conductance - See Conductivity, electrical
Erg (erg) - A non-SI (cgs) unit of energy, equal to 10-7 J.
Esters - Compounds formally derived from an oxoacid RC(=O)(OH) and
an alcohol, phenol, heteroarenol, or enol by linking, with formal loss
of water from an acidic hydroxy group of the former and a hydroxy
group of the latter. [5]
Esu - The electrostatic system of units, based upon the cm, g, and s plus
the esu of charge (sometimes called the statcoulomb or franklin).
Ethers - Compounds with formula ROR, where R is not equal to H. [5]
Euler number (Eu) - A dimensionless quantity used in fluid mechanics,
defined by Eu = ∆p/ρv2, where p is pressure, ρ is density, and v is
velocity. [2]
Eutectic - The point on a two-component solid-liquid phase diagram
which represents the lowest melting point of any possible mixture. A
liquid having the eutectic composition will freeze at a single tempera-
ture without change of composition.
Excitance (M) - Radiant energy flux leaving an element of a surface
divided by the area of that element. [1]
Exciton - A localized excited state consisting of a bound electron-hole
pair in a molecular or ionic crystal. The exciton can propagate through
the crystal.
Exosphere - The outermost part of the earth’s atmosphere, beginning at
about 500 to 1000 km above the surface. It is characterized by densities
so low that air molecules can escape into outer space.
Expansion coefficient - See thermal expansion coefficient.
Extended electron energy loss fine structure (EXELFS) - See Tech-
niques for Materials Characterization, page 12-1.
Extended x-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) - See Techniques
for Materials Characterization, page 12-1.
Extinction coefficient - See Absorption coefficient, molar
F-Center - See Color center
Fahrenheit temperature (°F) - The temperature scale based on the
assignment of 32°F = 0°C and a temperature interval of °F =(5/9)°C;
i.e., t/°F = (9/5)t/°C + 32.
Farad (F)* - The SI unit of electric capacitance, equal to C/V. [1]
Faraday constant (F)* - The electric charge of 1 mol of singly charged
positive ions; i.e., F = NAe, where NA is Avogadro’s constant and e is
the elementary charge. [1]
Faraday effect* - The rotation of the plane of plane-polarized light by a
medium placed in a magnetic field parallel to the direction of the light
beam. The effect can be observed in solids, liquids, and gasses.
Fatty acids - Aliphatic monocarboxylic acids derived from or contained
in esterified form in an animal or vegetable fat, oil, or wax. Natural
fatty acids commonly have a chain of 4 to 28 carbons (usually
unbranched and even-numbered), which may be saturated or unsatur-
ated. By extension, the term is sometimes used to embrace all acyclic
aliphatic carboxylic acids. [5]
Fermat’s principle - The law that a ray of light traversing one or more
media will follow a path which minimizes the time required to pass
between two given points.
Fermi (f) - Name sometimes used in nuclear physics for the femtometer.
Fermi level - The highest energy of occupied states in a solid at zero
temperature. Sometimes called Fermi energy. The Fermi surface is the
surface in momentum space formed by electrons occupying the Fermi
level.
Fermi resonance - An effect observed in vibrational spectroscopy when
an overtone of one fundamental vibration closely coincides in energy
with another fundamental of the same symmetry species. It leads to a
splitting of vibrational bands.
Fermi-Dirac distribution - A modification of the Boltzmann distribu-
K
a
a
a
a
c
d
a
b
=
⋅
⋅
C
D
A
B


--- PAGE 109 ---
TeamLRN
2-46
DEFINITIONS OF SCIENTIFIC TERMS (continued)
tion which takes into account the Pauli exclusion principle. The
number of particles of energy E is proportional to [e(E-µ)/kT+1]-1 , where
µ is a normalization constant, k the Boltzmann constant, and T the
temperature. The distribution is applicable to a system of fermions.
Fermion - A particle that obeys Fermi-Dirac statistics. Specifically, any
particle with spin equal to an odd multiple of 1/2. Examples are the
electron, proton, neutron, muon, etc.
Ferrimagnetism* - A type of magnetism in which the magnetic moments
of atoms in a solid are ordered into two nonequivalent sublattices with
unequal magnetic moments, leading to a nonzero magnetic suscepti-
bility.
Ferrite - A ferrimagnetic material of nominal formula MFe2O4, where M
is a divalent metal; widely used in microwave switches and other solid
state devices.
Ferroelectricity* - The retention of electric polarization by certain
materials after the external field that produced the polarization has
been removed.
Ferromagnetism* - A type of magnetism in which the magnetic mo-
ments of atoms in a solid are aligned within domains which can in turn
be aligned with each other by a weak magnetic field. Some ferromag-
netic materials can retain their magnetization when the external field
is removed, as long as the temperature is below a critical value, the
Curie temperature. They are characterized by a large positive magnetic
susceptibility.
Fick’s law - The statement that the flux J of a diffusing substance is
proportional to the concentration gradient, i.e., J = -D(dc/dx), where D
is called the diffusion coefficient.
Field - A mathematical construct which describes the interaction between
particles resulting from gravity, electromagnetism, or other physical
phenomena. In classical physics a field is described by equations.
Quantum field theory introduces operators to represent the physical
observables.
Field emission microscopy (FEM) - See Techniques for Materials
Characterization, page 12-1.
Field ion microscopy (FIM) - See Techniques for Materials Character-
ization, page 12-1.
Fine structure - The splitting in spectral lines that results from interac-
tions of the electron spin with the orbital angular momentum.
Fine structure constant (α)* - Defined as e2/2hcε0, where e is the
elementary charge, h Planck’s constant, c the speed of light, and ε0 the
permittivity of a vacuum. It is a measure of the strength of the
electromagnetic interaction between particles.
First radiation constant (c1)* - Constant (= 2πhc2) in the equation for the
radiant excitance Mλ of a black body:
where λ is the wavelength, T is the temperature, and c2 = hc/k is the
second radiation constant.
Flash point - The lowest temperature at which vapors above a volatile
combustible substance will ignite in air when exposed to a flame. [10]
Fluence (F) - Term used in photochemistry to specify the energy per unit
area delivered in a given time interval, for example by a laser pulse. [2]
Fluorocarbons - Compounds consisting solely of fluorine and carbon.
[5]
Fluxoid - The quantum of magnetic flux in superconductivity theory,
equal to hc/2e, where h is Planck’s constant, c the velocity of light, and
e the elementary charge.
Force (F) - The rate of change of momentum with time. [1]
Force constants (f, k)* - In molecular vibrations, the coefficients in the
expression of the potential energy in terms of atom displacements from
their equilibrium positions. In a diatomic molecule, f = d2V/dr2, where
V(r) is the potential energy and r is the interatomic distance. [2]
Fourier number (Fo) - A dimensionless quantity used in fluid mechan-
ics, defined by Fo = at/l2, where a is thermal diffusivity, t is time, and
l is length. [2]
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) - A technique for
obtaining an infrared spectrum by use of an interferometer in which the
path length of one of the beams is varied. A Fourier transformation of
the resulting interferogram yields the actual spectrum. The technique
is also used for NMR and other types of spectroscopy.
Fractals - Geometrical objects that are self-similar under a change of
scale; i.e., they appear similar at all levels of magnification. They can
be considered to have fractional dimensionality. Examples occur in
diverse fields such as geography (rivers and shorelines), biology
(trees), and solid state physics (amorphous materials).
Franck-Condon principle - An important principle in molecular spec-
troscopy which states that the nuclei in a molecule remain essentially
stationary while an electronic transition is taking place. The physical
interpretation rests on the fact that the electrons move much more
rapidly than the nuclei because of their much smaller mass.
Franklin (Fr) - Name sometimes given to the unit of charge in the esu
system.
Fraunhofer diffraction - Diffraction of light in situations where the
source and observation point are so far removed that the wave surfaces
may be considered planar.
Fraunhofer lines - Sharp absorption lines in the spectrum of sunlight,
caused by absorption of the solar blackbody radiation by atoms near
the sun’s surface.
Free radical - See Radicals. The term “free radical” is often used more
broadly for molecules that have a paramagnetic ground state (e.g., O2)
and sometimes for any transient or highly reactive molecular species.
Freezing point - See Melting point
Frequency (ν)* - Number of cycles of a periodic phenomenon divided by
time. [1]
Fresnel diffraction - Diffraction of light in a situation where the source
and observation point are sufficiently close together that the curvature
of the wave surfaces must be taken into account.
Froude number (Fr) - A dimensionless quantity used in fluid mechanics,
defined by Fr = v/(lg)1/2, where v is velocity, l is length, and g is
acceleration due to gravity. [2]
Fugacity (fB) - For a gas mixture, the fugacity of component B is defined
as the absolute activity λB times the limit, as the pressure p approaches
zero at constant temperature, of pB/λB. [2]
Fullerenes - Compounds composed solely of an even number of carbon
atoms, which form a cage-like fused-ring polycyclic system with
twelve five-membered rings and the rest six-membered rings. The
archetypal example is [60]fullerene, where the atoms and bonds
delineate a truncated icosahedron. The term has been broadened to
include any closed cage structure consisting entirely of three-coordi-
nate carbon atoms. [5]
Fulvalenes - The hydrocarbon fulvalene and its derivatives formed by
substitution (and by extension, analogues formed by replacement of
one or more carbon atoms of the fulvalene skeleton by a heteroatom).
[5]
Fulvenes - The hydrocarbon fulvene and its derivatives formed by
substitution (and by extension, analogues formed by replacement of
one or more carbon atoms of the fulvene skeleton by a heteroatom). [5]
Fundamental vibrational frequencies* - In molecular spectroscopy,
the characteristic vibrational frequencies obtained when the vibra-
tional energy is expressed in normal coordinates. They determine the
primary features of the infrared and Raman spectra of the molecule.
γ - Name sometimes used for microgram.
γ-rays* - Electromagnetic radiation (photons) with energy greater than
about 0.1 MeV (wavelength less than about 1 pm).
g-Factor of the electron* - The proportionality factor in the equation
M
c
c
T
λ
λ
λ
λ
=
1
5
1
–
/
–
∆
e 2


--- PAGE 111 ---
TeamLRN
2-48
DEFINITIONS OF SCIENTIFIC TERMS (continued)
Henry’s law * - An expression which applies to an ideal dilute solution
in which one or more gasses are dissolved, viz., pi = Hixi, where pi is
the partial pressure of component i above the solution, xi is its mole
fraction in the solution, and Hi is the Henry’s law constant (a charac-
teristic of the given gas and solvent, as well as the temperature).
Hermitian operator - An operator A that satisfies the relation ∫ um*Aundx
= (∫ un*Aum dx)*, where * indicates the complex conjugate. The
eigenvalues of Hermitian operators are real, and eigenfunctions be-
longing to different eigenvalues are orthogonal.
Hertz (Hz) - The SI unit of frequency, equal to s-1. [1]
Heterocyclic compounds - Cyclic compounds having as ring members
atoms of at least two different elements, e.g., quinoline, 1,2-thiazole,
bicyclo[3.3.1]tetrasiloxane. [5]
Heusler alloys - Alloys of manganese, copper, aluminum, nickel, and
sometimes other metals which find important uses as permanent
magnets.
Holography - A technique for creating a three-dimensional image of a
object by recording the interference pattern between a light beam
diffracted from the object and a reference beam. The image can be
reconstructed from this pattern by a suitable optical system.
Homopolymer - A polymer derived from one species of (real, implicit,
or hypothetical) monomer. [8]
Hooke’s law - The statement that the ratio of stress to strain is a constant
in a totally elastic medium.
Horse power - A non-SI unit of energy, equal to approximately 746 W.
Hubble constant - The ratio of the recessional velocity of an extragalactic
object to the distance of that object. Its value is about 2 × 10-18 s-1.
Huckel theory - A simple approximation for calculating the energy of
conjugated molecules in which only the resonance integrals between
neighboring bonds are considered. Also called CNDO method (com-
plete neglect of differential overlap).
Hume-Rothery rules - A set of empirical rules for predicting the
occurrence of solid solutions in metallic systems. The rules involve
size, crystal structure, and electronegativity.
Hund’s rules - A series of rules for predicting the sequence of energy
states in atoms and molecules. One of the important results is that when
two electrons exist in different orbitals, the state with their spins
parallel (triplet state) lies at lower energy than the state with antipar-
allel spins (singlet).
Hydrazines - Hydrazine (diazane), H2NNH2, and its hydrocarbyl deriva-
tives. When one or more substituents are acyl groups, the compound
is a hydrazide. [5]
Hydrocarbon - A compound containing only carbon and hydrogen. [5]
Hydrolysis - A reaction occurring in water in which a chemical bond is
cleaved and a new bond formed with the oxygen atom of water.
Hyperfine structure - Splitting of energy levels and spectral lines into
several closely spaced components as a result of interaction of nuclear
spin angular momentum with other angular momenta in the atom or
molecule.
Hysteresis* - An irreversible response of a system (parameter A) as a
function of an external force (parameter F), usually symmetric with
respect to the origin of the A vs. F graph after the initial application of
the force. A common example is magnetic induction vs. magnetic field
strength in a ferromagnet.
Ideal gas law - The equation of state pV = RT, which defines an ideal gas,
where p is pressure, V molar volume, T temperature, and R the molar
gas constant.
Ideal solution - A solution in which solvent-solvent and solvent-solute
interactions are identical, so that properties such as volume and
enthalpy are exactly additive. Ideal solutions follow Raoult’s law,
which states that the vapor pressure pi of component i is pi = xipi*,
where xi is the mole fraction of component i and pi* the vapor pressure
of the pure substance i.
Ignition temperature* - The lowest temperature at which combustion of
a material will occur spontaneously under specified conditions. Some-
times called autoignition temperature, kindling point. [10]
Imides - Diacyl derivatives of ammonia or primary amines, especially
those cyclic compounds derived from diacids. Also used for salts
having the anion RN2-. [5]
Impedence (Z) - The complex representation of potential difference
divided by the complex representation of current. In terms of reactance
X and resistance R, the impedance is given by Z = R + iX. [1]
Index of refraction (n)* - For a non-absorbing medium, the ratio of the
velocity of electromagnetic radiation in vacuo to the phase velocity of
radiation of a specified frequency in the medium. [1]
Inductance - The ratio of the electromagnetic force induced in a coil by
a current to the rate of change of the current.
Inductive coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (ICPMS) - See Tech-
niques for Materials Characterization, page 12-1.
Inertial defect - In molecular spectroscopy, the quantity Ic-Ia-Ib for a
molecule whose equilibrium configuration is planar, where Ia, Ib, and
Ic are the effective principal moments of inertia. The inertial defect for
a rigid planar molecule would be zero, but vibration-rotation interac-
tions in a real molecule lead to a positive inertial defect.
Insulator - A material in which the highest occupied energy band
(valence band) is completely filled with electrons, while the next
higher band (conduction band) is empty. Solids with an energy gap of
5 eV or more are generally considered as insulators at room tempera-
ture. Their conductivity is less than 10-6 S/m and increases with
temperature.
Intercalation compounds - Compounds resulting from reversible inclu-
sion, without covalent bonding, of one kind of molecule in a solid
matrix of another compound, which has a laminar structure. The host
compound, a solid, may be macromolecular, crystalline, or amor-
phous. [5]
International System of Units (SI)* - The unit system adopted by the
General Conference on Weights and Measures in 1960. It consists of
seven base units (meter, kilogram, second, ampere, kelvin, mole,
candela), plus derived units and prefixes. [1]
International Temperature Scale (ITS-90)* - The official international
temperature scale adopted in 1990. It consists of a set of fixed points
and equations which enable the thermodynamic temperature to be
determined from operational measurements. [9]
Ion - An atomic or molecular particle having a net electric charge. [3]
Ion exchange - A process involving the adsorption of one or several ionic
species accompanied by the simultaneous desorption (displacement)
of one or more other ionic species. [3]
Ion neutralization spectroscopy (INS) - See Techniques for Materials
Characterization, page 12-1.
Ionic strength (I) - A measure of the total concentration of ions in a
solution, defined by I = 1/2Σi zi2mi, where zi is the charge of ionic
species i and mi is its molality. For a 1-1 electrolyte at molality m, I =
m.
Ionization constant* - The equilibrium constant for a reaction in which
a substance in solution dissociates into ions.
Ionization potential* - The minimum energy required to remove an
electron from an isolated atom or molecule (in its vibrational ground
state) in the gaseous phase. More properly called ionization energy. [3]
Irradiance (E) - The radiant energy flux incident on an element of a
surface, divided by the area of that element. [1]
Isentropic process - A thermodynamic process in which the entropy of
the system does not change.
Ising model - A model describing the coupling between two atoms in a
ferromagnetic lattice, in which the interaction energy is proportional
to the negative of the product of the spin components along a specified
axis.


--- PAGE 113 ---
TeamLRN
2-50
DEFINITIONS OF SCIENTIFIC TERMS (continued)
Laser ionization mass spectroscopy (LIMS) - See Techniques for
Materials Characterization, page 12-1.
Lattice constants* - Parameters specifying the dimensions of a unit cell
in a crystal lattice, specifically the lengths of the cell edges and the
angles between them.
Lattice energy* - The energy per ion pair required to separate completely
the ions in a crystal lattice at a temperature of absolute zero.
Laue diagram - A diffraction pattern produced when an x-ray beam
passes through a thin slice of a crystal and impinges on a detector
behind the crystal.
Lenz’s law - The statement that the current induced in a circuit by a
change in magnetic flux is so directed as to oppose the change in flux
Leonard-Jones potential - A simple but useful function for approximat-
ing the interaction between two neutral atoms or molecules separated
by a distance r by writing the potential energy as U(r) = 4ε{(r0/r)12 -
(r0/r)6}, where ε and r0 are adjustable parameters. In this form the
depth of the potential well is ε and the minimum occurs at 21/6r0 . The
(1/r)12 term is often replaced by other powers of 1/r.
Lepton - One of the class of elementary particles that do not take part in
the strong interaction. Included are the electron, muon, and neutrino.
All leptons have a spin of 1/2.
Lewis number (Le) - A dimensionless quantity used in fluid mechanics,
defined by Le = a/D, where a is thermal diffusivity and D is diffusion
coefficient. [2]
Ligand field theory - A description of the structure of crystals containing
a transition metal ion surrounded by nonmetallic ions (ligands). It is
based on construction of molecular orbitals involving the d-orbitals of
the central metal ion and combinations of atomic orbitals of the
ligands.
Light year (l.y.) - A unit of distance used in astronomy, defined as the
distance light travels in one year in a vacuum. Its approximate value
is 9.46073 × 1015 m.
Lignins - Macromolecular constituents of wood related to lignans,
composed of phenolic propylbenzene skeletal units, linked at various
sites and apparently randomly. [5]
Ligroin - The petroleum fraction consisting mostly of C7 and C8 hydro-
carbons and boiling in the range 90-140°C; commonly used as a
laboratory solvent.
Lipids - A loosely defined term for substances of biological origin that are
soluble in nonpolar solvents. They consist of saponifiable lipids, such
as glycerides (fats and oils) and phospholipids, as well as
nonsaponifiable lipids, principally steroids. [5]
Lipoproteins - Clathrate complexes consisting of a lipid enwrapped in a
protein host without covalent binding, in such a way that the complex
has a hydrophilic outer surface consisting of all the protein and the
polar ends of any phospholipids. [5]
Liter (L)* - A synonym for cubic decimeter. [1]
Lithosphere* - The outer layer of the solid earth, extending from the base
of the mantle to the surface of the crust.
Lorentz contraction - The reduction in length of a moving body in the
direction of motion, given by the factor (1-v2/c2)1/2 ,  where v is the
velocity of the body and c the velocity of light. Also known as the
FitzGerald-Lorentz contraction.
Lorentz force - The force exerted on a point charge Q moving at velocity
v in the presence of external fields E and B. It is given (in SI units) by
F = Q(E + v × B).
Loss angle (δ) - For a dielectric material in an alternating electromagnetic
field, δ is the phase difference between the current and the potential
difference. The function tan δ is a measure of the ratio of the power
dissipated in the dielectric to the power stored.
Low energy electron diffraction (LEED) - See Techniques for Materi-
als Characterization, page 12-1.
Lumen (lm)* - The SI unit of luminous flux, equal to cd sr. [1]
Luminous flux (Φ) - The intensity of light from a source multiplied by
the solid angle. The SI unit is lumen. [1]
Lux (lx)* - The SI unit of illuminance, equal to cd sr m-2. [1]
Lyddane-Sachs-Teller relation - A relation between the phonon fre-
quencies and dielectric constants of an ionic crystal which states that
(ωT/ωL)2 = ε(∞)/ε(0), where ωT is the angular frequency of transverse
optical phonons, ωL that of longitudinal optical phonons, ε(0) is the
static dielectric constant, and ε(∞) the dielectric constant at optical
frequencies.
Lyman series - The series of lines in the spectrum of the hydrogen atom
which corresponds to transitions between the ground state (principal
quantum number n = 1) and successive excited states. The wave-
lengths are given by 1/λ = RH(1-1/n2), where n = 2,3,4,… and RH is the
Rydberg constant for hydrogen. The first member of the series (n =
1↔2), which is often called the Lyman-α line, falls at a wavelength of
1216 Å, and the series converges at 912 Å, the ionization limit of
hydrogen.
Mach number (Ma) - A dimensionless quantity used in fluid mechanics,
defined by Ma = v/c, where v is velocity and c is the speed of sound.
[2]
Macromolecule - A molecule of high relative molecular mass (molecular
weight), the structure of which essentially comprises the multiple
repetition of units derived, actually or conceptually, from molecules of
low relative molecular mass [8]
Madelung constant* - A constant characteristic of a particular crystal-
line material which gives a measure of the electrostatic energy binding
the ions in the crystal.
Magnetic field strength (H) - An axial vector quantity, the curl of which
is equal to the current density, including the displacement current. [1]
Magnetic induction (B) - An axial vector quantity such that the force
exerted on an element of current is equal to the vector product of this
element and the magnetic induction. [1]
Magnetic moment - See Dipole moment, magnetic.
Magnetic susceptibility (χm, κ)* - Defined by χm = (µ-µ0)/µ0, where µ
is the permeability of the medium and µ0 the permeability of a vacuum.
[1]
Magnetization (M) - Defined by M = (B/µ0)-H, where B is magnetic
induction, H magnetic field strength, and µ0 the permeability of a
vacuum. [1]
Magnetogyric ratio (γ) - Ratio of the magnetic moment of a particle to
its angular momentum. Also called gyromagnetic ratio.
Magneton - See Bohr magneton, Nuclear magneton.
Magnetostriction* - The change in dimensions of a solid sample when
it is placed in a magnetic field.
Magnon - A quantum of magnetic energy associated with a spin wave in
a ferromagnetic or antiferromagnetic crystal.
Mantle - The layer of the earth between the crust and the liquid outer core,
which begins about 2900 km below the earth’s surface.
Maser - A device in which a microwave cavity is filled with a medium
where a population inversion can be produced by some means. When
the resonant frequency of the cavity bears the proper relation to the
separation of the inverted energy levels, the device can serve as an
amplifier or oscillator at that frequency.
Mass (m)* - Quantity of matter. Mass can also be defined as “resistance
to acceleration”.
Mass defect (B) - Defined by B = Zm(1H) + Nmn - ma, where Z is the atomic
number, m(1H) is the mass of the hydrogen atom, N is the neutron
number, mn is the rest mass of the neutron, and ma is the mass of the
atom in question. Thus Bc2 can be equated to the binding energy of the
nucleus if the binding energy of atomic electrons is neglected. [1]
Mass excess (∆) - Defined by ∆ = ma - Amu, where ma is the mass of the


--- PAGE 114 ---
2-51
DEFINITIONS OF SCIENTIFIC TERMS (continued)
atom, A the number of nucleons, and mu the unified atomic mass
constant (mu = 1 u). [1]
Mass fraction (wB) - The ratio of the mass of substance B to the total mass
of a mixture. [1]
Mass number (A) - A characteristic property of a specific isotope of an
element, equal to the sum of the number of protons and neutrons in the
nucleus.
Mass spectrometry - An analytical technique in which ions are separated
according to the mass/charge ratio and detected by a suitable detector.
The ions may be produced by electron impact on a gas, a chemical
reaction, energetic vaporization of a solid, etc. [6]
Massieu function - A thermodynamic function defined by J = -A/T,
where A is the Helmholz energy and T the thermodynamic tempera-
ture. [2]
Matthiessen’s rule - The statement that the electrical resistivity ρ of a
metal can be written as ρ = ρL+ρi, where ρL is due to scattering of
conduction electrons by lattice vibrations and ρi to scattering by
impurities and imperfections. If the impurity concentration is small, ρi
is temperature independent.
Maxwell (Mx)* - A non-SI unit of magnetic field strength (H) equal
to 10-8 Wb. [1]
Maxwell’s equations - The fundamental equations of electromagnetism.
In a form appropriate to SI units, they are:
curl H = ∂D/∂t + j
div B = 0
curl E = -∂B/∂t
div D = ρ
where H is the magnetic field strength, B the magnetic induction, E the
electric field strength, D the electric displacement,  j the current
density, ρ the charge density, and t is time.
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution - An expression for the fraction of
molecules f(v) in a gas that have velocity v within a specified interval.
It takes the form
where M is the molar mass, R the molar gas constant, and T the
temperature.
Mean free path* - The average distance a gas molecule travels between
collisions.
Meissner effect - The complete exclusion of magnetic induction from the
interior of a superconductor.
Melting point* - The temperature at which the solid and liquid phases of
a substance are in equilibrium at a specified pressure (normally taken
to be atmospheric unless stated otherwise).
Mercaptans - A traditional term abandoned by IUPAC, synonymous
with thiols. This term is still widely used. [5]
Meson - Any elementary particle that has zero or integral spin. Mesons
are responsible for the forces between protons and neutrons in the
nucleus.
Mesosphere - The part of the earth’s atmosphere extending from the top
of the stratosphere (about 50 km above the surface) to 80-90 km. It is
characterized by a decrease in temperature with increasing altitude.
Metal - A material in which the highest occupied energy band (conduc-
tion band) is only partially filled with electrons. The electrical conduc-
tivity of metals generally decreases with temperature.
Metallocenes - Organometallic coordination compounds in which one
atom of a transition metal such as iron, ruthenium or osmium is bonded
to and only to the face of two cyclopentadienyl ligands which lie in
parallel planes. [5]
Meter (m)* - The SI base unit of length. [1]
Methine group - In organic compounds, the -C= group. [5]
Mho - An archaic name for the SI unit siemens (reciprocal ohm).
Micelle - A particle formed by the aggregation of surfactant molecules
(typically, 10 to 100 molecules) in solution. For aqueous solutions, the
hydrophilic end of the molecule is on the surface of the micelle, while
the hydrophobic end (often a hydrocarbon chain) points toward the
center. At the critical micelle concentration (cmc) the previously
dissolved molecules aggregate into a micelle.
Micron (µ) - An obsolete name for micrometer.
Mie scattering - The scattering of light by spherical dielectric particles
whose diameter is comparable to the wavelength of the light.
Milky way - The band of light in the night sky resulting from the stars in
the galactic plane. The term is also used to denote the galaxy in which
the sun is located.
Miller indices (hkl) - A set of indices used to label planes in a crystal
lattice. [2]
Millimeter of mercury (mmHg) - A non-SI unit of pressure, equal to
133.322 Pa. The name is generally considered interchangeable with
torr.
Mobility (µ)* - In solid state physics, the drift velocity of electrons or
holes in a solid divided by the applied electric field strength. The term
is used in a similar sense in other fields.
Molality (m) - A measure of concentration of a solution in which one
states the amount of substance (i.e., number of moles) of solute per
kilogram of solvent. Thus a 0.1 molal solution (often written as 0.1 m)
has m = 0.1 mol/kg.
Molar mass - The mass of one mole of a substance. It is normally
expressed in units of g/mol, in which case its numerical value is
identical with the molecular weight (relative molecular mass). [1]
Molar quantity - It is often convenient to express an extensive quantity
(e.g., volume, enthalpy, heat capacity, etc.) as the actual value divided
by amount of substance (number of moles). The resulting quantity is
called molar volume, molar enthalpy, etc
Molar refraction (R) - A property of a dielectric defined by the equation
R = Vm[(n2-1)/(n2+2)], where n is the index of refraction of the medium
(at optical wavelengths) and Vm the molar volume. It is related to the
polarizability α of the molecules that make up the medium by the
Lorenz-Lorentz equation, R = NAα/3ε0 , where NA is Avogadro’s
constant and ε0 is the permittivity of a vacuum.
Molarity (c) - A measure of concentration of a solution in which one
states the amount of substance (i.e., number of moles) of solute per liter
of solution. Thus a 0.1 molar solution (often referred to as 0.1 M) has
a concentration c = 0.1 mol/L.
Mole (mol)* - The SI base unit of amount of substance. [1]
Mole fraction (xB) - The ratio of the amount of substance (number of
moles) of substance B to the total amount of substance in a mixture. [1]
Molecular orbital - See Orbital.
Molecular weight (Mr)* - The ratio of the average mass per molecule or
specified entity of a substance to 1/12 of the mass of nuclide 12C. Also
called relative molar (or molecular) mass. [1]
Moment of inertia (I) - The moment of inertia of a body about an axis is
the sum (or integral) of the products of its elements of mass and the
squares of their distances from the axis. [1]
Momentum (p) - The product of mass and velocity. [1]
Monomer - A substance consisting of molecules which can undergo
polymerization, thereby contributing constitutional units to the essen-
tial structure of a macromolecule. [8]
Monosaccharides - A term which includes aldoses, ketoses, and a wide
variety of derivatives. [5]
Mössbauer effect - The recoilless emission of γ-rays from nuclei bound
in a crystal under conditions where the recoil energy associated with
the γ emission is taken up by the crystal as a whole. This results in a
very narrow line width, which can be exploited in various types of
precise measurements.
f v
M
RT
v e Mv
RT
( ) =
(
)
4
2
3 2
2
2
2
π
π
/
/
–
/


--- PAGE 115 ---
TeamLRN
2-52
DEFINITIONS OF SCIENTIFIC TERMS (continued)
Muon* - An unstable elementary particle of spin 1/2 and mass about 200
times that of the electron.
Naphtha - The petroleum fraction consisting mostly of C6 to C8 hydrocar-
bons and boiling in the range 80-120°C. Solvents derived from this
fraction include ligroin and petroleum ether.
Nautical mile - A non-SI unit of length, equal to exactly 1852 m.
Navier-Stokes equations - A set of complex equations for the motion of
a viscous fluid subject to external forces.
Néel temperature (TN)* - The critical temperature above which an
antiferromagnetic substance becomes paramagnetic. [1]
Nernst effect - The production of an electric field in a conductor subject
to an applied magnetic field and containing a transverse temperature
gradient. The electric field is perpendicular to the magnetic field and
the temperature gradient.
Network - In polymer science, a highly ramified macromolecule in which
essentially each constitutional unit is connected to each other consti-
tutional unit and to the macroscopic phase boundary by many perma-
nent paths through the macromolecule, the number of such paths
increasing with the number of intervening bonds. The paths must on
the average be coextensive with the macromolecule. [8]
Neutrino - A stable elementary particle in the lepton family. Neutrinos
have zero (or at least near-zero) rest mass and spin 1/2.
Neutron* - An elementary particle on spin 1/2 and zero charge. The free
neutron has a mean lifetime of 887 seconds. Neutrons and protons,
which are collectively called nucleons, are the constituents of the
nucleus.
Neutron activation analysis (NAA) - See Techniques for Materials
Characterization, page 12-1.
Neutron number (N) - A characteristic property of a specific isotope of
an element, equal to the number of neutrons in the nucleus.
Newton (N)* - The SI unit of force, equal to m kg s-2. [1]
Nitriles - Compounds having the structure RC≡N; thus C-substituted
derivatives of hydrocyanic acid, HC≡N. [5]
Nitrosamines - N-Nitroso amines: compounds of the structure R2NNO.
Compounds RNHNO are not ordinarily isolatable, but they, too, are
nitrosamines. The name is a contraction of N-nitrosoamine and, as
such, does not require the N locant. [5]
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)* - A widely used technique in
which the resonant absorption of radiofrequency radiation by mag-
netic nuclei in a magnetic field is measured. The results give important
information on the local environment of each nucleus.
Nuclear magneton (µN)* - The unit of nuclear magnetic moment,
defined as eh/4πmp, where h is Planck’s constant, mp the proton mass,
and e the elementary charge.
Nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR) - See Techniques for Materials
Characterization, page 12-1.
Nuclear reaction analysis (NRA) - See Techniques for Materials Char-
acterization, page 12-1.
Nuclear spin (I) - The quantum number that specifies the intrinsic
angular momentum of a particular nucleus. The magnitude of the
angular momentum is given by [I(I+1)]1/2 h/2π, where h is Planck’s
constant.
Nucleic acids* - Macromolecules, the major organic matter of the nuclei
of biological cells, made up of nucleotide units, and hydrolyzable into
certain pyrimidine or purine bases (usually adenine, cytosine, guanine,
thymine, uracil), D-ribose or 2-deoxy-D-ribose. [5]
Nucleon - A collective term for the proton and neutron.
Nucleosides - Ribosyl or deoxyribosyl derivatives (rarely, other glycosyl
derivatives) of certain pyrimidine or purine bases. They are thus
glycosylamines or N-glycosides related to nucleotides by the lack of
phosphorylation. [5]
Nucleotides - Compounds formally obtained by esterification of the 3′ or
5′ hydroxy group of nucleosides with phosphoric acid. They are the
monomers of nucleic acids and are formed from them by hydrolytic
cleavage. [5]
Nuclide - A species of atoms in which each atom has identical atomic
number Z and identical mass number A. [3]
Nusselt number (Nu) - A dimensionless quantity used in fluid mechan-
ics, defined by Nu = hl/k, where h is coefficient of heat transfer, l is
length, and k is thermal conductivity. [2]
Nyquist theorem - An expression for the mean square thermal noise
voltage across a resistor, given by 4RkT∆f  where R is the resistance,
k the Boltzmann constant, T the temperature, and ∆f the frequency
band within which the voltage is measured.
Octanol-water partition coefficient (P)* - A measure of the way in
which a compound will partition itself between the octanol and water
phases in the two-phase octanol-water system, and thus an indicator of
certain types of biological activity. Specifically, P is the ratio of the
concentration (in moles per liter) of the compound in the octanol phase
to that in the water phase at infinite dilution. The quantity normally
reported is log P.
Oersted (Oe) - A non-SI unit of magnetic field (H), equal to
79.57747 A/m.
Ohm (Ω)* - The SI unit of electric resistance, equal to V/A. [1]
Ohm’s law - A relation among electric current I, potential difference V,
and resistance R, viz., I = V/R. The resistance is constant at constant
temperature to high precision for many materials.
Olefins - Acyclic and cyclic hydrocarbons having one or more carbon-
carbon double bonds, apart from the formal ones in aromatic com-
pounds. The class olefins subsumes alkenes and cycloalkenes and the
corresponding polyenes. [5]
Oligomer - A substance consisting of molecules of intermediate relative
molecular mass (molecular weight), the structure of which essentially
comprises the multiple repetition of units derived, actually or concep-
tually, from molecules of low relative molecular mass. In contrast to
a polymer, the properties of an oligomer can vary significantly with the
removal of one or a few of its units. [8]
Oligopeptides - Peptides containing from three to nine amino groups. [5]
Onsager relations - An important set of equations in the thermodynamics
of irreversible processes. They express the symmetry between the
transport coefficients describing reciprocal processes in systems with
a linear dependence of flux on driving forces.
Optical rotary power - Angle by which the plane of polarization of a
light beam is rotated by an optically active medium, divided by path
length and by concentration of the active constituent. Depending on
whether mass or molar concentration is used, the modifier “specific”
or “molar” is attached. [2]
Orbital - A one-electron wavefunction. Atomic orbitals are classified as
s-, p-, d,- or f-orbitals according to whether the angular momentum
quantum number l = 0, 1, 2, or 3. Molecular orbitals, which are usually
constructed as linear combinations of atomic orbitals, describe the
distribution of electrons over the entire molecule.
Oscillator strength (f) - A measure of the intensity of a spectroscopic
transition, defined by
where ν is the frequency, µij the transition dipole moment, me the mass
of the electron, e the elementary charge, and h Planck’s constant.
Osmosis - The flow of a solvent in a system in which two solutions of
different concentration are separated by a semipermeable membrane
which cannot pass solute molecules. The solvent will flow from the
side of lower concentration to that of higher concentration, thus
tending to equalize the concentrations. The pressure that must be
f
Me
he
= 8
3
2
2
2
π
ν µij


--- PAGE 116 ---
2-53
DEFINITIONS OF SCIENTIFIC TERMS (continued)
applied to the more concentrated side to stop the flow is called the
osmotic pressure.
Osmotic coefficient (φ) - Defined by φ = ln aA/(MAΣmB), where MA is the
molar mass of substance A (normally the solvent), aA is its activity, and
the mB are molalities of the solutes. [1]
Osmotic pressure (Π) - The excess pressure necessary to maintain
osmotic equilibrium between a solution and the pure solvent separated
by a membrane permeable only to the solvent. In an ideal dilute
solution Π = cBRT , where cB is the amount-of-substance concentration
of the solute, R is the molar gas constant, and T the temperature. [1,2]
Ostwald dilution law - A relation for the concentration dependence of the
molar conductivity Λ of an electrolyte solution, viz.,
where c is the solute concentration, K is the equilibrium constant for
dissociation of the solute, and Λ° is the conductivity at cΛ = 0.
Ounce (oz) - A non-SI unit of mass. The avoirdupois once equals
28.34952 g, while the troy ounce equals 31.10348 g.
Overpotential (η) - In an electrochemical cell, the difference between the
potential of an electrode and its zero-current value.
Oximes - Compounds of structure R2C=NOH derived from condensation
of aldehydes or ketones with hydroxylamine. Oximes from aldehydes
may be called aldoximes; those from ketones may be called ketoximes.
[5]
Oxo compounds - Compounds containing an oxygen atom, =O, doubly
bonded to carbon or another element. The term thus embraces alde-
hydes, carboxylic acids, ketones, sulfonic acids, amides and esters. [5]
Ozonides - The 1,2,4-trioxolanes formed by the reaction of ozone at a
carbon-carbon double bond, or the analogous compounds derived
from acetylenic compounds. [5]
Pair production - A process in which a photon is converted into a particle
and its antiparticle (e.g., an electron and positron) in the electromag-
netic field of a nucleus.
Paraffins - Obsolescent term for saturated hydrocarbons, commonly but
not necessarily acyclic. Still widely used in the petrochemical indus-
try, where the term designates acyclic saturated hydrocarbons, and
stands in contradistinction to naphthenes. [5]
Paramagnetism* - A type of magnetism characterized by a positive
magnetic susceptibility, so that the material becomes weakly magne-
tized in the direction of an external field. The magnetization disap-
pears when the field in removed. In the simplest approximation
(Curie’s law) the susceptibility is inversely proportional to tempera-
ture.
Parity - The property of a quantum-mechanical wave function that
describes its behavior under the symmetry operation of coordinate
inversion. A parity of +1 (or even) is assigned if the wave function does
not change sign when the signs of all the coordinates are changed; the
parity is -1 (or odd) if the wave function changes sign under this
operation.
Parsec (pc) - A unit of distance defined as the distance at which 1
astronomical unit (AU) subtends an angle of 1 second of arc. It is equal
to 206264.806 AU or 3.085678 × 1016 m.
Particle induced x-ray emission (PIXE) - See Techniques for Materials
Characterization, page 12-1.
Partition function (q, z) - For a single molecule, q = Σi giexp(εi/kT), where
εi is an energy level of degeneracy gi, k the Boltzmann constant, and T
the absolute temperature; the summation extends over all energy
states. For a system of N non-interacting molecules which are indistin-
guishable, as in an ideal gas, the canonical partition function Q = qN/
N!.
Pascal (Pa)* - The SI unit of pressure, equal to N/m2. [1]
Paschen series - The series of lines in the spectrum of the hydrogen atom
which corresponds to transitions between the state with principal
quantum number n = 3 and successive higher states. The wavelengths
are given by 1/λ = RH(1/9-1/n2), where n = 4,5,6,… and RH is the
Rydberg constant. The first member of the series (n = 3↔4), which is
often called the Pα line, falls in the infrared at a wavelength of 1.875
µm.
Paschen-Back effect - In atomic spectroscopy, the decoupling of elec-
tron spin from orbital angular momentum as the strength of an external
magnetic field is increased.
Pauli exclusion principle - The statement that two electrons in an atom
cannot have identical quantum numbers; thus if there are two electrons
in the same orbital, their spin quantum numbers must be of opposite
sign.
Pearson symbol - A code for designating crystallographic information,
including the crystal system, the lattice type, and the number of atoms
per unit cell.
Péclet number (Pe) - A dimensionless quantity used in fluid mechanics,
defined by Pe = vl/a, where v is velocity, l is length, and a is thermal
diffussivity. [2]
Peltier effect - The absorption or generation of heat (depending on the
current direction) which occurs when an electric current is passed
through a junction between two materials.
Peptides - Amides derived from two or more amino carboxylic acid
molecules (the same or different) by formation of a covalent bond from
the carbonyl carbon of one to the nitrogen atom of another with formal
loss of water. [5]
Permeability (µ) - Magnetic induction divided by magnetic field strength;
i.e. µ = B/H. The relative permeability µr = µ/µ0, where µ0 is the
permeability of a vacuum. [1]
Permittivity (ε) - Ratio of the electric displacement in a medium to the
electric field strength. Also called dielectric constant. [1]
Peroxides - Compounds of structure ROOR in which R may be any
organic group. In inorganic chemistry, salts of the anion O2-2 [5]
Peroxy acids - Acids in which an acidic -OH group has been replaced by
an -OOH group; e.g. CH3C(=O)OOH peroxyacetic acid, PhS(=O)2OOH
benzeneperoxysulfonic acid. [5]
Petroleum ether - The petroleum fraction consisting of C5 and C6
hydrocarbons and boiling in the range 35-60°C; commonly used as a
laboratory solvent.
pH* - A convenient measure of the acid-base character of a solution,
usually defined by pH = -log [c(H+)/mol L-1)], where c(H+) is the
concentration of hydrogen ions.The more precise definition is in terms
af activity rather than concentration. [2]
Phenols - Compounds having one or more hydroxy groups attached to a
benzene or other arene ring. [5]
Phonon - A quantum of energy associated with a vibrational mode of a
crystal lattice.
Phosphines - PH3 and compounds derived from it by substituting one,
two or three hydrogen atoms by hydrocarbyl groups. RPH2, R2PH and
R3P (R not equal to H) are called primary, secondary and tertiary
phosphines, respectively. [5]
Phosphonium compounds - Salts (and hydroxides) [R4P]+X- containing
tetracoordinate phosphonium ion and the associated anion. [5]
Phosphonium ylides - Compounds having the structure R3P+-C-R2
1 R3P=CR 2. Also known as Wittig reagents. [5]
Phosphoresence - The process by which a molecule is excited by light to
a higher electronic state and then undergoes a radiationless transition
to a state of different multiplicity from which it decays, after some
delay, to the ground state. The emitted light is normally of longer
wavelength than the exciting light because vibrational energy has been
dissipated.
1
1
2
Λ
Λ
Λ
Λ
=
+
( )
o
o
c
K


--- PAGE 119 ---
TeamLRN
2-56
DEFINITIONS OF SCIENTIFIC TERMS (continued)
Schmidt number (Sc) - A dimensionless quantity used in fluid mechan-
ics, defined by Sc = η/ρD, where η is viscosity, ρ is density, and D is
diffusion coefficient. [2]
Schottky barrier - A potential barrier associated with a metal-semicon-
ductor contact. It forms the basis for the rectifying device known as the
Schottly diode.
Schrödinger equation - The basic equation of wave mechanics which,
for systems not dependent on time, takes the form:
where ψ is the wavefunction, V is the potential energy expressed as a
function of the spatial coordinates, E is an energy eigenvalue, ∇2 is the
Laplacian operator, \ is Planck’s constant divided by 2π, and m is the
mass.
Second (s)* - The SI base unit of time. [1]
Second radiation constant (c2)* - See First radiation constant.
Secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS) - See Techniques for Mate-
rials Characterization, page 12-1.
Seebeck effect - The development of a potential difference in a circuit
where two different metals or semiconductors are joined and their
junctions maintained at different temperatures. It is the basis of the
thermocouple.
Selenides - Compounds having the structure RSeR (R not equal to H).
They are thus selenium analogues of ethers. Also used for metal salts
of H2Se. [5]
Semicarbazones 
- 
Compounds 
having 
the 
structure
R2C=NNHC(=O)NH2, formally derived by condensation of alde-
hydes or ketones with semicarbazide [NH2NHC(=O)NH2]. [5]
Semiconductor - A material in which the highest occupied energy band
(valence band) is completely filled with electrons at T = 0 K, and the
energy gap to the next highest band (conduction band) ranges from 0
to 4 or 5 eV. With increasing temperature electrons are excited into the
conduction band, leading to an increase in the electrical conductivity.
Semiquinones - Radical anions having the structure -O-Z-O⋅ where Z is
an ortho- or para-arylene group or analogous heteroarylene group;
they are formally generated by the addition of an electron to a quinone.
[5]
SI units* - The International System of Units adopted in 1960 and
recommended for use in all scientific and technical fields. [1]
Siemens (S)* - The SI unit of electric conductance, equal to Ω-1. [1]
Sievert (Sv)* - The SI unit of dose equivalent (of radiation), equal to J/
kg. [1]
Silanes - Saturated silicon hydrides, analogues of the alkanes; i.e.
compounds of the general formula SinH2n+2. Silanes may be subdi-
vided into silane, oligosilanes, and polysilanes. Hydrocarbyl deriva-
tives are often referred to loosely as silanes. [5]
Silicones - Polymeric or oligomeric siloxanes, usually considered un-
branched, of general formula [-OSiR2-]n (R not equal to H). [5]
Siloxanes - Saturated silicon-oxygen hydrides with unbranched or
branched chains of alternating silicon and oxygen atoms (each silicon
atom is separated from its nearest silicon neighbors by single oxygen
atoms). [5]
Skin effect - The concentration of high frequency alternating currents
near the surface of a conductor.
Slater orbital - A particular mathematical expression for the radial part
of the wave function of a single electron, which is used in quantum-
mechanical calculations of the energy and other properties of atoms
and molecules.
Small angle neutron scattering (SANS) - See Techniques for Materials
Characterization, page 12-1.
Snell’s law - The relation between the angle of incidence i and the angle
of refraction r of a light beam which passes from a medium of
refractive index n0 to a medium of index n1, viz., sin i/sin r = n1/n0.
Solar constant* - The mean radiant energy flux from the sun on a unit
surface normal to the direction of the rays at the mean distance of the
earth from the sun. The value is approximately 1373 W/m2.
Solar wind - The stream of high velocity hydrogen and helium ions
emitted by the sun which flows through the solar system and beyond.
Soliton - A spatially localized wave in a solid or liquid that can interact
strongly with other solitons but will afterwards regain its original
form.
Solubility* - A quantity expressing the maximum concentration of some
material (the solute) that can exist in another liquid or solid material
(the solvent) at thermodynamic equilibrium at specified temperature
and pressure. Common measures of solubility include the mass of
solute per unit mass of solution (mass fraction), mole fraction of
solute, molality, molarity, and others.
Solubility product constant (Ksp)* - The equilibrium constant for the
dissolution of a sparsely soluble salt into its constituent ions.
Space group* - A group of symmetry operations (reflections, rotations,
etc.) that leave a crystal invariant. A total of 230 space groups have
been identified.
Spark source mass spectroscopy (SSMS) - See Techniques for Materi-
als Characterization, page 12-1.
Specific gravity - Ratio of the mass density of a material to that of water.
Since one must specify the temperature of both the sample and the
water to have a precisely defined quantity, the use of this term is now
discouraged.
Specific heat - Heat capacity divided by mass. See Heat capacity.
Specific quantity - It is often convenient to express an extensive quantity
(e.g., volume, enthalpy, heat capacity, etc.) as the actual value divided
by mass. The resulting quantity is called specific volume, specific
enthalpy, etc.
Specific rotation [α]θλ- For an optically active substance, defined by
[α]θλ = α/γl, where α is the angle through which plane polarized light
is rotated by a solution of mass concentration γ and path length l. Here
θ is the Celsius temperature and λ the wavelength of the light at which
the measurement is carried out. Also called specific optical rotatory
power. [2]
Spin (s, I)* - A measure of the intrinsic angular momentum of a particle,
which it possesses independent of its orbital motion. The symbol s is
used for the spin quantum number of an electron, while I is generally
used for nuclear spin.
Spiro compounds - Compounds having one atom (usually a quaternary
carbon) as the only common member of two rings. [5]
Stacking fault - An error in the normal sequence of layer growth in a
crystal.
Standard mean ocean water (SMOW) - A standard sample of pure
water of accurately known isotopic composition which is maintained
by the International Atomic Energy Agency. It is used for precise
calibration of density and isotopic composition measurements.
Standard reduction potential (E°) - The zero-current potential of a cell
in which the specified reduction reaction occurs at the right-hand
electrode and the left-hand electrode is the standard hydrogen elec-
trode. Also called Standard electrode potential.
Standard state - A defined state (specified temperature, pressure, con-
centration, etc.) for tabulating thermodynamic functions and carrying
out thermodynamic calculations. The standard state pressure is usually
taken as 100,000 Pa (1 bar), but various standard state temperatures are
used. [2]
Stanton number (St) - A dimensionless quantity used in fluid mechanics,
defined by St = h/ρvcp, where h is coefficient of heat transfer, ρ is
–
/
h 2
2
m
V
E
(
)∇
+
=
ψ
ψ
ψ


--- PAGE 126 ---
,
	
	

		(#"'&)
"
		
	
		7	#
$
&*#"

		
	
$
#''&*#%	

	-	3("
		*
$
	
+"!'%&*#%	
&	

'	
)	11	

			7

)	1
		&')1	
	&')1	
				7C7&')1/8558/		7	

	
	
	
	
&')1
	
C	<
	

		
D	
'

	+	1!	E<F	%
.
			
	

,,-.

---	-
 	
&	
'
		
#	370		 1G,
, +2+) '	-<'	&&$	"	
"
$$
%
&
7,,(
	*HC
	.	 
/ 1	%	<	
	'()I#@@7	@
	8	@	@J-'+.K
4 0	1	2	 $$I#@@

@@K
Ac
acetyl
Ac2O
acetic anhydride
AcOEt
ethyl acetate
ac
acid
ace
acetone
al
alcohol (ethanol)
alk
alkali
amor
amorphous
anh
anhydrous
aq
aqueous
bipym
bipyramidal
bl
blue
blk
black
bp
boiling point
br
brown
bt
bright
Bu
butyl
BuOH
1-butanol
bz
benzene
chl
chloroform
col
colorless
con, conc
concentrated
cry
crystals
ctc
carbon tetrachloride
cy, cyhex
cyclohexane
dec
decomposes
den
density
dil
dilute
diox
dioxane
dk
dark
DMF
dimethylformamide
DMSO
dimethyl sulfoxide
efﬂor
efﬂorescent
Et
ethyl
EtOH
ethanol
eth
diethyl ether
exp
explodes
ﬂ
ﬂakes
ﬂr
ﬂuorescent
fum
fumes, fuming
gl
glacial
gr
gray
gran
granular
grn
green
hex
hexagonal
HOAc
acetic acid
hp
heptane
hx
hexane
hyd
hydrate
hyg
hygroscopic
i
insoluble
i-
iso-
iso
isooctane
lf
leaves
lig
ligroin
liq
liquid
lo
long
mcl
monoclinic
Me
methyl
MeCN
acetonitrile
MeOH
methanol
misc, msc
miscible
mp
melting point
n
refractive index
nd
needles
oct
octahedra, octahedral
oran
orange
orth
orthorhombic
os
organic solvents
pa
pale
peth
petroleum ether
Ph
phenyl
PhCl
chlorobenzene
PhNH2
aniline
PhNO2
nitrobenzene
pl
plates
pow
powder
Pr
propyl
PrOH
1-propanol
pr
prisms
purp
purple
py
pyridine
pym
pyramids, pyramidal
reac
reacts
rhom
rhombic
s
soluble
sat
saturated
sc
scales
sl
slightly soluble
soln
solution
sp
sublimation point
stab
stable
sub
sublimes
sulf
sulfuric acid
syr
syrup
tab
tablets
tcl
triclinic
tetr
tetragonal
tfa
triﬂuoroacetic acid
thf, THF
tetrahydrofuran
tol 
toluene
tp
triple point
trg
trigonal
unstab
unstable
vap
vapor
viol
violet
visc
viscous
vol
volatile
vs
very soluble
w
water
wh
white
xyl
xylene
ye
yellow


--- PAGE 704 ---
THE ELEMENTS (continued)
4-2
experiments at the Livermore Laboratory and Joint Institute for Nuclear Research in Dubna, Russia indicated that Element 116 had since been created
directly. (See also under Elements 116 and 118.)
Laboratory processes have now extended the radioactive element mass numbers beyond 238 to about 280. Each element from atomic numbers 1
to 110 is known to have at least one radioactive isotope. As of December 2001, about 3286 isotopes and isomers were thought to be known and
recognized.  Many stable and radioactive isotopes are now produced and distributed by the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tenn., U.S.A.,
to customers licensed by the U.S. Department of Energy.
The nucleus of an atom is characterized by the number of protons it contains, denoted by Z, and by the number of neutrons, N. Isotopes of an element
have the same value of Z, but different values of N. The mass number A, is the sum of Z and N. For example, Uranium-238 has a mass number of 238,
and contains 92 protons and 146 neutrons.
There is evidence that the definition of chemical elements must be broadened to include the electron. Several compounds known as electrides, have
recently been made of alkaline metal elements and electrons. A relatively stable combination of a positron and electron, known as positronium, has
also been studied.
The well-known proton, neutron, and electron are now thought to be members of a group that includes other fundamental particles that have been
discovered or hypothesized by physicists. These very elemental particles, of which all matter is made, are now thought to belong to one of two families:
namely, quarks or leptons. Each of these two families consists of six particles. Also, there are four different force carriers that lead to interactions
between particles. The six members or “flavors” of the quark family are called up, charm, top, down, strange, and bottom. The force carriers for
the quarks are the gluon and the photon. The six members of the lepton family are the e neutrino, the mu neutrino, the tau neutrino, the electron,
the muon particle, and the tau particle. The force carriers for these are the w boson and the z boson. Furthermore, it appears that each of these particles
has an anti-particle that has an opposite electrical charge from the above particles.
Quarks are not found individually, but are found with other quarks arranged to form composites known as hadrons. There are two basic types of
hadrons: baryons, composed of three quarks, and mesons, composed of a quark and an anti-quark. Examples of baryons are the neutron and the proton.
Neutrons are made of two down quarks and one up quark. Protons are made of two up quarks and one down quark. An example of the meson is the
pion. This particle is made of an up quark and a down anti-quark. Such particles are unstable and tend to decay rapidly. The anti-particle of the proton
is the anti-proton. The exception to the rule is the electron, whose anti-particle is the positron.
In recent years a search has been made for a hypothetical particle known as the Higgs particle or Higgs boson, suggested in 1966 by Peter Higgs
of the University of Edinburgh, which could possibly explain why the carriers of the “electro-weak” field (w and z bosons) have mass. The Higgs
particle is thought to be responsible possibly for the mass of objects throughout the universe.
Many physicists now hold that all matter and energy in the universe is controlled by four fundamental forces: the electromagnetic force, gravity,
a weak nuclear force, and a strong nuclear force. The gluon binds quarks together by carrying the strong nuclear force. Each of these natural forces
is passed back and forth among the basic particles of matter by the force carriers mentioned above. The electromagnetic force is carried by the photon,
the weak nuclear force by the intermediate vector boson, and the gravity by the graviton.
For more complete information on these fundamental particles, please consult recent articles and books on nuclear or particle physics.
The available evidence leads to the conclusion that elements 89 (actinium) through 103 (lawrencium) are chemically similar to the rare-earth or
lanthanide elements (elements 57 to 71, inclusive). These elements therefore have been named actinides after the first member of this series. Those
elements beyond uranium that have been produced artificially have the following names and symbols: neptunium, 93 (Np); plutonium, 94 (Pu);
americium, 95 (Am); curium, 96 (Cm); berkelium, 97 (Bk); californium, 98 (Cf); einsteinium, 99 (Es); fermium, 100 (Fm); mendelevium, 101 (Md);
nobelium, 102 (No); and lawrencium, 103 (Lr). It is now claimed that Elements 104 through 112 have been produced and identified. More recently,
Elements 118, 116, and 114 were reported found (see Element 118). In August 1997, the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC)
gave final approval to the following names for Elements 104 to 109: Element 104 — rutherfordium (Rf); Element 105 — dubnium (Db); Element 106
— seaborgium (Sg); Element 107 — bohrium (Bh); Element 108 — hassium (Hs); and Element 109 — meitnerium (Mt). The recently discovered
elements 110, 111, 112, 114, etc. have not yet been named, but may carry temporary names as designated by the International Union of Pure and Applied
Chemistry. IUPAC recommends that until the existence of a new element is proven to their satisfaction, the elements are to have names and symbols
derived according to these precise and simple rules: The name is based on the digits in the element’s atomic number. Each digit is replaced with these
expressions, with the end using the usual –ium suffix as follows: 0 nil, 1 un, 2 bi, 3 tri, 4 quad, 5 pent, 6 hex, 7 sept, 8 oct, 9 enn. Double letter i’s
are not used, as for example Ununbiium, but would be Ununbium. The symbol used would be the first letter of the three main syllables. For example,
Element 126 would be Unbihexium, with the symbol Ubh. It is thought there is a possibility of producing elements beyond Element 116  and discovering
Elements 117, 115, and 113 by altering the beams of ions and the targets from those now being used.
There are many claims in the literature of the existence of various allotropic modifications of the elements, some of which are based on doubtful
or incomplete evidence. Also, the physical properties of an element may change drastically by the presence of small amounts of impurities. With new
methods of purification, which are now able to produce elements with 99.9999% purity, it has been necessary to restudy the properties of the elements.
For example, the melting point of thorium changes by several hundred degrees by the presence of a small percentage of ThO2 as an impurity. Ordinary
commercial tungsten is brittle and can be worked only with difficulty. Pure tungsten, however, can be cut with a hacksaw, forged, spun, drawn, or
extruded. In general, the value of a physical property given here applies to the pure element, when it is known.
Many of the chemical elements and their compounds are toxic and should be handled with due respect and care. In recent years there has been a
greatly increased knowledge and awareness of the health hazards associated with chemicals, radioactive materials, and other agents. Anyone working
with the elements and certain of their compounds should become thoroughly familiar with the proper safeguards to be taken.  Information on specific
hazards and recommended exposure limits may also be found in Section 16. Reference should also be made to publications such as the following:
1. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 29, Labor. With additions found in issues of the Federal Register.
2. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 10, Energy. With additions found in issues of the Federal Register. (Published by the U.S. Government Printing
Office. Supt. of Documents.)
3. Occupational Safety and Health Reporter  (latest edition with amendments and corrections), Bureau of National Affairs, Washington, D.C.


--- PAGE 707 ---
TeamLRN
THE ELEMENTS (continued)
4-5
from the target by heating it in air. Only about 0.05 µg of astatine has been prepared to date. The “time of flight” mass spectrometer has been used
to confirm that this highly radioactive halogen behaves chemically very much like other halogens, particularly iodine. The interhalogen compounds
AtI, AtBr, and AtCl are known to form, but it is not yet known if astatine forms diatomic astatine molecules. HAt and CH3At (methyl astatide) have
been detected. Astatine is said to be more metallic that iodine, and, like iodine, it probably accumulates in the thyroid gland. Workers at the Brookhaven
National Laboratory have recently used reactive scattering in crossed molecular beams to identify and measure elementary reactions involving astatine.
Barium — (Gr. barys, heavy), Ba; at. wt. 137.327(7), at. no. 56; m.p. 727°C; b.p. 1897°C; sp. gr. 3.5 (20°C); valence 2. Baryta was distinguished
from lime by Scheele in 1774; the element was discovered by Sir Humphrey Davy in 1808. It is found only in combination with other elements, chiefly
in barite or heavy spar (sulfate) and witherite (carbonate) and is prepared by electrolysis of the chloride. Large deposits of barite are found in China,
Germany, India, Morocco, and in the U.S. Barium is a metallic element, soft, and when pure is silvery white like lead; it belongs to the alkaline earth
group, resembling calcium chemically. The metal oxidizes very easily and should be kept under petroleum or other suitable oxygen-free liquids to
exclude air. It is decomposed by water or alcohol. The metal is used as a “getter” in vacuum tubes. The most important compounds are the peroxide
(BaO2), chloride, sulfate, carbonate, nitrate, and chlorate. Lithopone, a pigment containing barium sulfate and zinc sulfide, has good covering power,
and does not darken in the presence of sulfides. The sulfate, as permanent white or blanc fixe, is also used in paint, in X-ray diagnostic work, and in
glassmaking. Barite is extensively used as a weighting agent in oilwell drilling fluids, and also in making rubber. The carbonate has been used as a
rat poison, while the nitrate and chlorate give green colors in pyrotechny. The impure sulfide phosphoresces after exposure to the light. The compounds
and the metal are not expensive. Barium metal (99.2 + % pure) costs about $3/g. All barium compounds that are water or acid soluble are poisonous.
Naturally occurring barium is a mixture of seven stable isotopes. Thirty six other radioactive isotopes and isomers are known to exist.
Berkelium — (Berkeley, home of the University of California), Bk; at. wt. (247); at. no. 97; m.p. 1050°C; valence 3 or 4; sp. gr. 14 (est.). Berkelium,
the eighth member of the actinide transition series, was discovered in December 1949 by Thompson, Ghiorso, and Seaborg, and was the fifth
transuranium element synthesized. It was produced by cyclotron bombardment of milligram amounts of 241Am with helium ions at Berkeley,
California. The first isotope produced had a mass number of 243 and decayed with a half-life of 4.5 hours. Thirteen isotopes are now known and have
been synthesized. The existence of 249Bk, with a half-life of 320 days, makes it feasible to isolate berkelium in weighable amounts so that its properties
can be investigated with macroscopic quantities. One of the first visible amounts of a pure berkelium compound, berkelium chloride, was produced
in 1962. It weighed 3 billionth of a gram. Berkelium probably has not yet been prepared in elemental form, but it is expected to be a silvery metal,
easily soluble in dilute mineral acids, and readily oxidized by air or oxygen at elevated temperatures to form the oxide. X-ray diffraction methods have
been used to identify the following compounds: BkO2, BkO3, BkF3, BkCl, and BkOCl. As with other actinide elements, berkelium tends to accumulate
in the skeletal system. The maximum permissible body burden of 249Bk in  the human skeleton is about 0.0004 µg. Because of its rarity, berkelium
presently has no commercial or technological use. Berkelium most likely resembles terbium with respect to chemical properties. Berkelium-249 is
available from O.R.N.L. at a cost of $185/µg plus packing charges.
Beryllium — (Gr. beryllos, beryl; also called Glucinium or Glucinum, Gr. glykys, sweet), Be; at. wt. 9.012182(3); at no. 4; m.p. 1287°C; b.p.
2471°C; sp. gr. 1.848 (20°C); valence 2. Discovered as the oxide by Vauquelin in beryl and in emeralds in 1798. The metal was isolated in 1828 by
Wohler and by Bussy independently by the action of potassium on beryllium chloride. Beryllium is found in some 30 mineral species, the most
important of which are bertrandite, beryl, chrysoberyl, and phenacite. Aquamarine and emerald are precious forms of beryl. Beryllium minerals are
found in the U.S., Brazil, Russia, Kazakhstan, and elsewhere. Colombia is known for its emeralds. Beryl (3BeO · Al2O3 · 6SiO2) and bertrandite (4BeO
· 2SiO2 · H2O) are the most important commercial sources of the element and its compounds. Most of the metal is now prepared by reducing beryllium
fluoride with magnesium metal. Beryllium metal did not become readily available to industry until 1957. The metal, steel gray in color, has many
desirable properties. It is one of the lightest of all metals, and has one of the highest melting points of the light metals. Its modulus of elasticity is about
one third greater than that of steel. It resists attack by concentrated nitric acid, has excellent thermal conductivity, and is nonmagnetic. It has a high
permeability to X-rays, and when bombarded by alpha particles, as from radium or polonium, neutrons are produced in the ratio of about 30 neutrons/
million alpha particles. At ordinary temperatures beryllium resists oxidation in air, although its ability to scratch glass is probably due to the formation
of a thin layer of the oxide. Beryllium is used as an alloying agent in producing beryllium copper which is extensively used for springs, electrical
contacts, spot-welding electrodes, and nonsparking tools. It has found application as a structural material for high-speed aircraft, missiles, spacecraft,
and communication satellites. It is being used in the windshield frame, brake discs, support beams, and other structural components of the space shuttle.
Because beryllium is relatively transparent to X-rays, ultra-thin Be-foil is finding use in X-ray lithography for reproduction of microminiature
integrated circuits. Natural beryllium is made of 9Be and is stable. Eight other radioactive isotopes are known.
Beryllium is used in nuclear reactors as a reflector or moderator for it has a low thermal neutron absorption cross section. It is used in gyroscopes,
computer parts, and instruments where lightness, stiffness, and dimensional stability are required. The oxide has a very high melting point and is also
used in nuclear work and ceramic applications. Beryllium and its salts are toxic and should be handled with the greatest of care. Beryllium and its
compounds should not be tasted to verify the sweetish nature of beryllium (as did early experimenters). The metal, its alloys, and its salts can be handled
safely if certain work codes are observed, but no attempt should be made to work with beryllium before becoming familiar with proper safeguards.
Beryllium metal is available at a cost of about $5/g (99.5% pure).
Bismuth — (Ger. Weisse Masse, white mass; later Wisuth and Bisemutum), Bi; at. wt. 208.98038(2); at. no. 83; m.p. 271.4°C; b.p. 1564°C; sp.
gr. 9.747 (20°C); valence 3 or 5. In early times bismuth was confused with tin and lead. Claude Geoffroy the Younger showed it to be distinct from
lead in 1753. It is a white crystalline, brittle metal with a pinkish tinge. It occurs native. The most important ores are bismuthinite or bismuth glance
(Bi2S3) and bismite (Bi2O3). Peru, Japan, Mexico, Bolivia, and Canada are major bismuth producers. Much of the bismuth produced in the U.S. is
obtained as a by-product in refining lead, copper, tin, silver, and gold ores. Bismuth is the most diamagnetic of all metals, and the thermal conductivity
is lower than any metal, except mercury. It has a high electrical resistance, and has the highest Hall effect of any metal (i.e., greatest increase in electrical
resistance when placed in a magnetic field). “Bismanol” is a permanent magnet of high coercive force, made of MnBi, by the U.S. Naval Surface
Weapons Center. Bismuth expands 3.32% on solidification. This property makes bismuth alloys particularly suited to the making of sharp castings
of objects subject to damage by high temperatures. With other metals such as tin, cadmium, etc., bismuth forms low-melting alloys which are
extensively used for safety devices in fire detection and extinguishing systems. Bismuth is used in producing malleable irons and is finding use as a
catalyst for making acrylic fibers. When bismuth is heated in air it burns with a blue flame, forming yellow fumes of the oxide. The metal is also used
as a thermocouple material, and has found application as a carrier for U235 or U233 fuel in atomic reactors. Its soluble salts are characterized by forming


--- PAGE 710 ---
THE ELEMENTS (continued)
4-8
compounds, many thousands of which are vital to organic and life processes. Without carbon, the basis for life would be impossible. While it has been
thought that silicon might take the place of carbon in forming a host of similar compounds, it is now not possible to form stable compounds with very
long chains of silicon atoms. The atmosphere of Mars contains 96.2% CO2. Some of the most important compounds of carbon are carbon dioxide (CO2),
carbon monoxide (CO), carbon disulfide (CS2), chloroform (CHCl3), carbon tetrachloride (CCl4), methane (CH4), ethylene (C2H4), acetylene (C2H2),
benzene (C6H6), ethyl alcohol (C2H5OH), acetic acid (CH3COOH), and their derivatives. Carbon has fifteen isotopes. Natural carbon consists of
98.89% 12C and 1.11% 13C. In 1961 the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry adopted the isotope carbon-12 as the basis for atomic
weights. Carbon-14, an isotope with a half-life of 5715 years, has been widely used to date such materials as wood, archeological specimens, etc. A
new brittle form of carbon, known as “glassy carbon”, has been developed. It can be obtained with high purity. It has a high resistance to corrosion,
has good thermal stability, and is structurally impermeable to both gases and liquids. It has a randomized structure, making it useful in ultra-high
technology applications, such as crystal growing, crucibles for high-temperature use, etc. Glassy carbon is available at a cost of about $35/10gms.
Fullerene powder is available at a cost of about $55/10mg (99%C10). Diamond powder (99.9%) costs about $40/g
Cerium — (named for the asteroid Ceres, which was discovered in 1801 only 2 years before the element), Ce; at. wt. 140.115(4); at. no. 58; m.p.
798°C; b.p. 3424°C; sp. gr. 6.770 (25°C); valence 3 or 4. Discovered in 1803 by Klaproth and by Berzelius and Hisinger; metal prepared by Hillebrand
and Norton in 1875. Cerium is the most abundant of the metals of the so-called rare earths. It is found in a number of minerals including allanite (also
known as orthite), monazite, bastnasite, cerite, and samarskite. Monazite and bastnasite are presently the two most important sources of cerium. Large
deposits of monazite found on the beaches of Travancore, India, in river sands in Brazil, and deposits of allanite in the western United States, and
bastnasite in Southern California will supply cerium, thorium, and the other rare-earth metals for many years to come. Metallic cerium is prepared
by metallothermic reduction techniques, such as by reducing cerous fluoride with calcium, or by electrolysis of molten cerous chloride or other cerous
halides. The metallothermic technique is used to produce high-purity cerium. Cerium is especially interesting because of its variable electronic
structure. The energy of the inner 4f level is nearly the same as that of the outer or valence electrons, and only small amounts of energy are required
to change the relative occupancy of these electronic levels. This gives rise to dual valency states. For example, a volume change of about 10% occurs
when cerium is subjected to high pressures or low temperatures. It appears that the valence changes from about 3 to 4 when it is cooled or compressed.
The low temperature behavior of cerium is complex. Four allotropic modifications are thought to exist: cerium at room temperature and at atmospheric
pressure is known as γ cerium. Upon cooling to –16°C, γ cerium changes to β cerium. The remaining γ cerium starts to change to α cerium when cooled
to –172°C, and the transformation is complete at –269°C. α Cerium has a density of 8.16; δ cerium exists above 726°C. At atmospheric pressure, liquid
cerium is more dense than its solid form at the melting point. Cerium is an iron-gray lustrous metal. It is malleable, and oxidizes very readily at room
temperature, especially in moist air. Except for europium, cerium is the most reactive of the “rare-earth” metals. It slowly decomposes in cold water,
and rapidly in hot water. Alkali solutions and dilute and concentrated acids attack the metal rapidly. The pure metal is likely to ignite if scratched with
a knife. Ceric salts are orange red or yellowish; cerous salts are usually white. Cerium is a component of misch metal, which is extensively used in
the manufacture of pyrophoric alloys for cigarette lighters, etc. Natural cerium is stable and contains four isotopes. Thirty-two other radioactive isotopes
and isomers are known. While cerium is not radioactive, the impure commercial grade may contain traces of thorium, which is radioactive. The oxide
is an important constituent of incandescent gas mantles and it is emerging as a hydrocarbon catalyst in “self-cleaning” ovens. In this application it can
be incorporated into oven walls to prevent the collection of cooking residues. As ceric sulfate it finds extensive use as a volumetric oxidizing agent
in quantitative analysis. Cerium compounds are used in the manufacture of glass, both as a component and as a decolorizer. The oxide is finding
increased use as a glass polishing agent instead of rouge, for it is much faster than rouge in polishing glass surfaces. Cerium compounds are finding
use in automobile exhaust catalysts. Cerium is also finding use in making permanent magnets. Cerium, with other rare earths, is used in carbon-arc
lighting, especially in the motion picture industry. It is also finding use as an important catalyst in petroleum refining and in metallurgical and nuclear
applications. In small lots, cerium costs about $5/g (99.9%).
Cesium — (L. caesius, sky blue), Cs; at. wt. 132.90545(2); at. no. 55; m.p. 28.44°C; b.p. 671°C; sp. gr. 1.873 (20°C); valence 1. Cesium was
discovered spectroscopically by Bunsen and Kirchhoff in 1860 in mineral water from Durkheim. Cesium, an alkali metal, occurs in lepidolite, pollucite
(a hydrated silicate of aluminum and cesium), and in other sources. One of the world’s richest sources of cesium is located at Bernic Lake, Manitoba.
The deposits are estimated to contain 300,000 tons of pollucite, averaging 20% cesium. It can be isolated by electrolysis of the fused cyanide and by
a number of other methods. Very pure, gas-free cesium can be prepared by thermal decomposition of cesium azide. The metal is characterized by a
spectrum containing two bright lines in the blue along with several others in the red, yellow, and green. It is silvery white, soft, and ductile. It is the
most electropositive and most alkaline element. Cesium, gallium, and mercury are the only three metals that are liquid at room temperature. Cesium
reacts explosively with cold water, and reacts with ice at temperatures above –116°C. Cesium hydroxide, the strongest base known, attacks glass.
Because of its great affinity for oxygen the metal is used as a “getter” in electron tubes. It is also used in photoelectric cells, as well as a catalyst in
the hydrogenation of certain organic compounds. The metal has recently found application in ion propulsion systems. Cesium is used in atomic clocks,
which are accurate to 5 s in 300 years. A second of time is now defined as being the duration of 9,192,631,770 periods of the radiation corresponding
to the transition between the two hyper-fine levels of the ground state of the cesium-133 atom. Its chief compounds are the chloride and the nitrate.
Cesium has 52 isotopes and isomers with masses ranging from 112 to 148. The present price of cesium is about $50/g (99.98%) sealed in a glass
ampoule.
Chlorine — (Gr. chloros, greenish yellow), Cl; at. wt. 35.4527(9); at. no. 17; m.p. –101.5°C; b.p. –34.04°C; tc 143.8°C; density 3.214 g/l; sp. gr.
1.56 (–33.6°C); valence 1, 3, 5, or 7. Discovered in 1774 by Scheele, who thought it contained oxygen; named in 1810 by Davy, who insisted it was
an element. In nature it is found in the combined state only, chiefly with sodium as common salt (NaCl), carnallite (KMgCl3 · 6H2O), and sylvite (KCl).
It is a member of the halogen (salt-forming) group of elements and is obtained from chlorides by the action of oxidizing agents and more often by
electrolysis; it is a greenish-yellow gas, combining directly with nearly all elements. At 10°C one volume of water dissolves 3.10 volumes of chlorine,
at 30°C only 1.77 volumes. Chlorine is widely used in making many everyday products. It is used for producing safe drinking water the world over.
Even the smallest water supplies are now usually chlorinated. It is also extensively used in the production of paper products, dyestuffs, textiles,
petroleum products, medicines, antiseptics, insecticides, foodstuffs, solvents, paints, plastics, and many other consumer products. Most of the chlorine
produced is used in the manufacture of chlorinated compounds for sanitation, pulp bleaching, disinfectants, and textile processing. Further use is in
the manufacture of chlorates, chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, and in the extraction of bromine. Organic chemistry demands much from chlorine, both
as an oxidizing agent and in substitution, since it often brings desired properties in an organic compound when substituted for hydrogen, as in one form


--- PAGE 711 ---
TeamLRN
THE ELEMENTS (continued)
4-9
of synthetic rubber. Chlorine is a respiratory irritant. The gas irritates the mucous membranes and the liquid burns the skin. As little as 3.5 ppm can
be detected as an odor, and 1000 ppm is likely to be fatal after a few deep breaths. It was used as a war gas in 1915. Natural chlorine contains two isotopes.
Twenty other isotopes and isomers are known.
Chromium — (Gr. chroma, color), Cr; at. wt. 51.9961(6); at. no. 24; m.p. 1907°C; b.p. 2671°C; sp. gr. 7.18 to 7.20 (20°C); valence chiefly 2,
3, or 6. Discovered in 1797 by Vauquelin, who prepared the metal the next year, chromium is a steel-gray, lustrous, hard metal that takes a high polish.
The principal ore is chromite (FeCr2O4), which is found in Zimbabwe, Russia, South Africa, Turkey, Iran, Albania, Finland, Democratic Republic of
Madagascar, the Philippines, and elsewhere. The U.S. has no appreciable chromite ore reserves. The metal is usually produced by reducing the oxide
with aluminum. Chromium is used to harden steel, to manufacture stainless steel, and to form many useful alloys. Much is used in plating to produce
a hard, beautiful surface and to prevent corrosion. Chromium is used to give glass an emerald green color. It finds wide use as a catalyst. All compounds
of chromium are colored; the most important are the chromates of sodium and potassium (K2CrO4) and the dichromates (K2Cr2O7) and the potassium
and ammonium chrome alums, as KCr(SO4)2 · 12H2O. The dichromates are used as oxidizing agents in quantitative analysis, also in tanning leather.
Other compounds are of industrial value; lead chromate is chrome yellow, a valued pigment. Chromium compounds are used in the textile industry
as mordants, and by the aircraft and other industries for anodizing aluminum. The refractory industry has found chromite useful for forming bricks
and shapes, as it has a high melting point, moderate thermal expansion, and stability of crystalline structure. Chromium is an essential trace element
for human health. Many chromium compounds, however, are acutely toxic, chronically toxic, and may be carcinogenic. They  should be handled with
proper safeguards. Natural chromium contains four isotopes. Twenty other isotopes are known. Chromium metal (99.95%) costs about $1000/kg.
Commercial grade chromium (99%) costs about $75/kg.
Cobalt — (Kobald, from the German, goblin or evil spirit, cobalos, Greek, mine), Co; at. wt. 58.93320(1); at. no. 27; m.p. 1495°C; b.p. 2927°C;
sp. gr. 8.9 (20°C); valence 2 or 3. Discovered by Brandt about 1735. Cobalt occurs in the mineral cobaltite, smaltite, and erythrite, and is often associated
with nickel, silver, lead, copper, and iron ores, from which it is most frequently obtained as a by-product. It is also present in meteorites. Important
ore deposits are found in Congo-Kinshasa, Australia, Zambia, Russia, Canada, and elsewhere. The U.S. Geological Survey has announced that the
bottom of the north central Pacific Ocean may have cobalt-rich deposits at relatively shallow depths in waters close to the Hawaiian Islands and other
U.S. Pacific territories. Cobalt is a brittle, hard metal, closely resembling iron and nickel in appearance. It has a magnetic permeability of about two
thirds that of iron. Cobalt tends to exist as a mixture of two allotropes over a wide temperature range; the β-form predominates below 400°C, and the
α above that temperature. The transformation is sluggish and accounts in part for the wide variation in reported data on physical properties of cobalt.
It is alloyed with iron, nickel and other metals to make Alnico, an alloy of unusual magnetic strength with many important uses. Stellite alloys,
containing cobalt, chromium, and tungsten, are used for high-speed, heavy-duty, high temperature cutting tools, and for dies. Cobalt is also used in
other magnet steels and stainless steels, and in alloys used in jet turbines and gas turbine generators. The metal is used in electroplating because of
its appearance, hardness, and resistance to oxidation. The salts have been used for centuries for the production of brilliant and permanent blue colors
in porcelain, glass, pottery, tiles, and enamels. It is the principal ingredient in Sevre’s and Thenard’s blue. A solution of the chloride (CoCl2 · 6H2O)
is used as sympathetic ink. The cobalt ammines are of interest; the oxide and the nitrate are important. Cobalt carefully used in the form of the chloride,
sulfate, acetate, or nitrate has been found effective in correcting a certain mineral deficiency disease in animals. Soils should contain 0.13 to 0.30 ppm
of cobalt for proper animal nutrition.Cobalt is found in Vitamin B-12, which is essential for human nutrition.  Cobalt of 99.9+% purity is priced at
about$250/kg. Cobalt-60, an artificial isotope, is an important gamma ray source, and is extensively used as a tracer and a radiotherapeutic agent. Single
compact sources of Cobalt-60 vary from about $1 to $10/curie, depending on quantity and specific activity. Thirty isotopes and isomers of cobalt are
known.
Columbium — See Niobium.
Copper — (L. cuprum, from the island of Cyprus), Cu; at. wt. 63.546(3); at. no. 29; f.p. 1084.62 °C; b.p. 2562°C; sp. gr. 8.96 (20°C); valence 1
or 2. The discovery of copper dates from prehistoric times. It is said to have been mined for more than 5000 years. It is one of man’s most important
metals. Copper is reddish colored, takes on a bright metallic luster, and is malleable, ductile, and a good conductor of heat and electricity (second only
to silver in electrical conductivity). The electrical industry is one of the greatest users of copper. Copper occasionally occurs native, and is found in
many minerals such as cuprite, malachite, azurite, chalcopyrite, and bornite. Large copper ore deposits are found in the U.S., Chile, Zambia, Zaire,
Peru, and Canada. The most important copper ores are the sulfides, oxides, and carbonates. From these, copper is obtained by smelting, leaching, and
by electrolysis. Its alloys, brass and bronze, long used, are still very important; all American coins are now copper alloys; monel and gun metals also
contain copper. The most important compounds are the oxide and the sulfate, blue vitriol; the latter has wide use as an agricultural poison and as an
algicide in water purification. Copper compounds such as Fehling’s solution are widely used in analytical chemistry in tests for sugar. High-purity
copper (99.999 + %) is readily available commercially. The price of commercial copper has fluctuated widely. The price of copper in December 2001
was about $1.50/kg. Natural copper contains two isotopes. Twenty-six other radioactive isotopes and isomers are known.
Curium — (Pierre and Marie Curie), Cm; at. wt. (247); at. no. 96; m.p. 1345°C; sp. gr. 13.51 (calc.); valence 3 and 4. Although curium follows
americium in the periodic system, it was actually known before americium and was the third transuranium element to be discovered. It was identified
by Seaborg, James, and Ghiorso in 1944 at the wartime Metallurgical Laboratory in Chicago as a result of helium-ion bombardment of 239Pu in the
Berkeley, California, 60-inch cyclotron. Visible amounts (30 µg) of 242Cm, in the form of the hydroxide, were first isolated by Werner and Perlman
of the University of California in 1947. In 1950, Crane, Wallmann, and Cunningham found that the magnetic susceptibility of microgram samples of
CmF3 was of the same magnitude as that of GdF3. This provided direct experimental evidence for assigning an electronic configuration to Cm+3. In
1951, the same workers prepared curium in its elemental form for the first time. Sixteen isotopes of curium are now known. The most stable, 247Cm,
with a half-life of 16 million years, is so short compared to the earth’s age that any primordial curium must have disappeared long ago from the natural
scene. Minute amounts of curium probably exist in natural deposits of uranium, as a result of a sequence of neutron captures and β decays sustained
by the very low flux of neutrons naturally present in uranium ores. The presence of natural curium, however, has never been detected. 242Cm and 244Cm
are available in multigram quantities. 248Cm has been produced only in milligram amounts. Curium is similar in some regards to gadolinium, its rare-
earth homolog, but it has a more complex crystal structure. Curium is silver in color, is chemically reactive, and is more electropositive than aluminum.
CmO2, Cm2O3, CmF3, CmF4, CmCl3, CmBr3, and CmI3 have been prepared. Most compounds of trivalent curium are faintly yellow in color. 242Cm
generates about three watts of thermal energy per gram. This compares to one-half watt per gram of 238Pu. This suggests use for curium as a power
source. 244Cm is now offered for sale by the O.R.N.L. at $185/mg plus packing charges. 248Cm is available at a cost of $160/µg, plus packing charges,


--- PAGE 712 ---
THE ELEMENTS (continued)
4-10
from the O.R.N.L. Curium absorbed into the body accumulates in the bones, and is therefore very toxic as its radiation destroys the red-cell forming
mechanism. The maximum permissible total body burden of 244Cm (soluble) in a human being is 0.3 µCi (microcurie).
Deuterium, an isotope of hydrogen — see Hydrogen.
Dubnium — (named after the Joint Institute of Nuclear Research in Dubna, Russia). Db; at.wt. [262]; at.no. 105. In 1967 G. N. Flerov reported
that a Soviet team working at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research at Dubna may have produced a few atoms of 260105 and 261105 by bombarding
243Am with 22Ne. Their evidence was based on time-coincidence measurements of alpha energies. More recently, it was reported that early in 1970
Dubna scientists synthesized Element 105 and that by the end of April 1970 “had investigated all the types of decay of the new element and had
determined its chemical properties.” In late April 1970, it was announced that Ghiorso, Nurmia, Harris, K. A. Y. Eskola, and P. L. Eskola, working
at the University of California at Berkeley, had positively identified Element 105. The discovery was made by bombarding a target of 249Cf with a
beam of 84 MeV nitrogen nuclei in the Heavy Ion Linear Accelerator (HILAC). When a 15N nuclear is absorbed by a 249Cf nucleus, four neutrons are
emitted and a new atom of 260105 with a half-life of 1.6 s is formed. While the first atoms of Element 105 are said to have been detected conclusively
on March 5, 1970, there is evidence that Element 105 had been formed in Berkeley experiments a year earlier by the method described. Ghiorso and
his associates have attempted to confirm Soviet findings by more sophisticated methods without success.
In October 1971, it was announced that two new isotopes of Element 105 were synthesized with the heavy ion linear accelerator by A. Ghiorso
and co-workers at Berkeley. Element 261105 was produced both by bombarding 250Cf with 15N and by bombarding 249Bk with 16O. The isotope emits
8.93-MeV α particles and decays to 257Lr with a half-life of about 1.8 s. Element 262105 was produced by bombarding 249Bk with 18O. It emits 8.45
MeV α particles and decays to 258Lr with a half-life of about 40 s. Nine isotopes of Dubnium are now recognized. Soon after the discovery the names
Hahnium and Joliotium, named after Otto Hahn and Jean-Frederic Joliot and Mme. Joliot-Curie, were suggested as names for Element 105. The
IUPAC in August 1997 finally resolved the issue, naming Element 105 Dubnium with the symbol Db. Dubnium is thought to have properties similar
to tantalum.
Dysprosium — (Gr. dysprositos, hard to get at), Dy; at. wt. 162.50(3); at. no. 66; m.p. 1412°C; b.p. 2567°C; sp. gr. 8.551 (25°C); valence 3.
Dysprosium was discovered in 1886 by Lecoq de Boisbaudran, but not isolated. Neither the oxide nor the metal was available in relatively pure form
until the development of ion-exchange separation and metallographic reduction techniques by Spedding and associates about 1950. Dysprosium occurs
along with other so-called rare-earth or lanthanide elements in a variety of minerals such as xenotime, fergusonite, gadolinite, euxenite, polycrase, and
blomstrandine. The most important sources, however, are from monazite and bastnasite. Dysprosium can be prepared by reduction of the trifluoride
with calcium. The element has a metallic, bright silver luster. It is relatively stable in air at room temperature, and is readily attacked and dissolved,
with the evolution of hydrogen, by dilute and concentrated mineral acids. The metal is soft enough to be cut with a knife and can be machined without
sparking if overheating is avoided. Small amounts of impurities can greatly affect its physical properties. While dysprosium has not yet found many
applications, its thermal neutron absorption cross-section and high melting point suggest metallurgical uses in nuclear control applications and for
alloying with special stainless steels. A dysprosium oxide-nickel cermet has found use in cooling nuclear reactor rods. This cermet absorbs neutrons
readily without swelling or contracting under prolonged neutron bombardment. In combination with vanadium and other rare earths, dysprosium has
been used in making laser materials. Dysprosium-cadmium chalcogenides, as sources of infrared radiation, have been used for studying chemical
reactions. The cost of dysprosium metal has dropped in recent years since the development of ion-exchange and solvent extraction techniques, and
the discovery of large ore bodies. Thirty two isotopes and isomers are now known. The metal costs about $6/g (99.9% purity).
Einsteinium — (Albert Einstein [1879–1955]), Es; at. wt. (252); m.p. 860°C (est.); at. no. 99. Einsteinium, the seventh transuranic element of the
actinide series to be discovered, was identified by Ghiorso and co-workers at Berkeley in December 1952 in debris from the first large thermonuclear
explosion, which took place in the Pacific in November 1952. The isotope produced was the 20-day 253Es isotope. In 1961, a sufficient amount of
einsteinium was produced to permit separation of a macroscopic amount of 253Es. This sample weighed about 0.01 µg. A special magnetic-type balance
was used in making this determination. 253Es so produced was used to produce mendelevium. About 3 µg of einsteinium has been produced at Oak
Ridge National Laboratories by irradiating for several years kilogram quantities of 239Pu in a reactor to produce 242Pu. This was then fabricated into
pellets of plutonium oxide and aluminum powder, and loaded into target rods for an initial 1-year irradiation at the Savannah River Plant, followed
by irradiation in a HFIR (High Flux Isotopic Reactor). After 4 months in the HFIR the targets were removed for chemical separation of the einsteinium
from californium. Nineteen isotopes and isomers of einsteinium are now recognized. 254Es has the longest half-life (276 days). Tracer studies using
253Es show that einsteinium has chemical properties typical of a heavy trivalent, actinide element. Einsteinium is extremely radioactive. Great care
must be taken when handling it.
Element 93 — See Neptunium.
Element 94 — See Plutonium.
Element 95 — See Americium.
Element 96 — See Curium.
Element 97 — See Berkelium.
Element 98 — See Californium.
Element 99 — See Einsteinium.
Element 100 — See Fermium (unnilnilium).
Element 101 — See Mendelevium (unnilunium).
Element 102 — See Nobelium (unnilbium).
Element 103 — See Lawrencium (unniltrium).
Element 104 — See Rutherfordium (unnilquadium).
Element 105 — See Dubnium (unnilpentium).
Element 106 — See Seaborgium (unnilhexium).
Element 107 — See Bohrium (unnilseptium).
Element 108 — See Hassium (unniloctium).
Element 109 — See Meitnerium (unnilennium).


--- PAGE 714 ---
THE ELEMENTS (continued)
4-12
The cost of 99.9% erbium metal is about $21/g. Erbium is finding nuclear and metallurgical uses. Added to vanadium, for example, erbium lowers
the hardness and improves workability. Most of the rare-earth oxides have sharp absorption bands in the visible, ultraviolet, and near infrared. This
property, associated with the electronic structure, gives beautiful pastel colors to many of the rare-earth salts. Erbium oxide gives a pink color and has
been used as a colorant in glasses and porcelain enamel glazes.
Europium — (Europe), Eu; at. wt. 151.964(1); at. no. 63; m.p. 822°C; b.p. 1596°C; sp. gr. 5.244 (25°C); valence 2 or 3. In 1890 Boisbaudran
obtained basic fractions from samarium-gadolinium concentrates which had spark spectral lines not accounted for by samarium or gadolinium. These
lines subsequently have been shown to belong to europium. The discovery of europium is generally credited to Demarcay, who separated the rare earth
in reasonably pure form in 1901. The pure metal was not isolated until recent years. Europium is now prepared by mixing Eu2O3 with a 10%-excess
of lanthanum metal and heating the mixture in a tantalum crucible under high vacuum. The element is collected as a silvery-white metallic deposit
on the walls of the crucible. As with other rare-earth metals, except for lanthanum, europium ignites in air at about 150 to 180°C. Europium is about
as hard as lead and is quite ductile. It is the most reactive of the rare-earth metals, quickly oxidizing in air. It resembles calcium in its reaction with
water. Bastnasite and monazite are the principal ores containing europium. Europium has been identified spectroscopically in the sun and certain stars.
Europium isotopes are good neutron absorbers and are being studied for use in nuclear control applications. Europium oxide is now widely used as
a phosphor activator and europium-activated yttrium vanadate is in commercial use as the red phosphor in color TV tubes. Europium-doped plastic
has been used as a laser material. With the development of ion-exchange techniques and special processes, the cost of the metal has been greatly reduced
in recent years. Natural europium contains two stable isotopes. Thirty five other radioactive isotopes and isomers are known. Europium is one of the
rarest and most costly of the rare-earth metals. It is priced at about $60/g (99.9% pure).
Fermium — (Enrico Fermi [1901–1954], nuclear physicist), Fm; at. wt. [257]; at. no. 100; m.p. 1527°C. Fermium, the eighth transuranium element
of the actinide series to be discovered, was identified by Ghiorso and co-workers in 1952 in the debris from a thermonuclear explosion in the Pacific
in work involving the University of California Radiation Laboratory, the Argonne National Laboratory, and the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory.
The isotope produced was the 20-hour 255Fm. During 1953 and early 1954, while discovery of elements 99 and 100 was withheld from publication
for security reasons, a group from the Nobel Institute of Physics in Stockholm bombarded 238U with 16O ions, and isolated a 30-min α-emitter, which
they ascribed to 250100, without claiming discovery of the element. This isotope has since been identified positively, and the 30-min half-life confirmed.
The chemical properties of fermium have been studied solely with tracer amounts, and in normal aqueous media only the (III) oxidation state appears
to exist. The isotope 254Fm and heavier isotopes can be produced by intense neutron irradiation of lower elements such as plutonium by a process of
successive neutron capture interspersed with beta decays until these mass numbers and atomic numbers are reached. Twenty isotopes and isomers of
fermium are known to exist. 257Fm, with a half-life of about 100.5 days, is the longest lived. 250Fm, with a half-life of 30 min, has been shown to be
a product of decay of Element 254102. It was by chemical identification of 250Fm that production of Element 102 (nobelium) was confirmed. Fermium
would probably have chemical properties resembling erbium.
Fluorine — (L. and F. fluere, flow, or flux), F; at. wt. 18.9984032(5); at. no. 9; m.p. –219.62°C (1 atm); b.p. –188.12°C (1 atm); tc -129.02°C;
density 1.696 g/L (0°C, 1 atm); liq. den. at b.p. 1.50 g/cm3; valence 1. In 1529, Georgius Agricola described the use of fluorspar as a flux, and as early
as 1670 Schwandhard found that glass was etched when exposed to fluorspar treated with acid. Scheele and many later investigators, including Davy,
Gay-Lussac, Lavoisier, and Thenard, experimented with hydrofluoric acid, some experiments ending in tragedy. The element was finally isolated in
1886 by Moisson after nearly 74 years of continuous effort. Fluorine occurs chiefly in fluorspar (CaF2) and cryolite (Na2AlF6), and is in topaz and
other minerals. It is a member of the halogen family of elements, and is obtained by electrolyzing a solution of potassium hydrogen fluoride in anhydrous
hydrogen fluoride in a vessel of metal or transparent fluorspar. Modern commercial production methods are essentially variations on the procedures
first used by Moisson. Fluorine is the most electronegative and reactive of all elements. It is a pale yellow, corrosive gas, which reacts with practically
all organic and inorganic substances. Finely divided metals, glass, ceramics, carbon, and even water burn in fluorine with a bright flame. Until World
War II, there was no commercial production of elemental fluorine. The atom bomb project and nuclear energy applications, however, made it necessary
to produce large quantities. Safe handling techniques have now been developed and it is possible at present to transport liquid fluorine by the ton.
Fluorine and its compounds are used in producing uranium (from the hexafluoride) and more than 100 commercial fluorochemicals, including many
well-known high-temperature plastics. Hydrofluoric acid is extensively used for etching the glass of light bulbs, etc. Fluorochloro hydrocarbons have
been extensively used in air conditioning and refrigeration. However, in recent years the U.S. and other countries have been phasing out ozone-depleting
substances, such as the fluorochloro hydrocarbons that have been used in these applications. It has been suggested that fluorine might be substituted
for hydrogen wherever it occurs in organic compounds, which could lead to an astronomical number of new fluorine compounds. The presence of
fluorine as a soluble fluoride in drinking water to the extent of 2 ppm may cause mottled enamel in teeth, when used by children acquiring permanent
teeth; in smaller amounts, however, fluorides are said to be beneficial and used in water supplies to prevent dental cavities. Elemental fluorine has been
studied as a rocket propellant as it has an exceptionally high specific impulse value. Compounds of fluorine with rare gases have now been confirmed.
Fluorides of xenon, radon, and krypton are among those known. Elemental fluorine and the fluoride ion are highly toxic. The free element has a
characteristic pungent odor, detectable in concentrations as low as 20 ppb, which is below the safe working level. The recommended maximum
allowable concentration for a daily 8-hour time-weighted exposure is 1 ppm. Fluorine is known to have fourteen isotopes.
Francium — (France), Fr; at. no. 87; at. wt. [223]; m.p. 27°C; valence 1. Discovered in 1939 by Mlle. Marguerite Perey of the Curie Institute,
Paris. Francium, the heaviest known member of the alkali metal series, occurs as a result of an alpha disintegration of actinium. It can also be made
artificially by bombarding thorium with protons. While it occurs naturally in uranium minerals, there is probably less than an ounce of francium at
any time in the total crust of the earth. It has the highest equivalent weight of any element, and is the most unstable of the first 101 elements of the
periodic system. Thirty-six isotopes and isomers of francium are recognized. The longest lived 223Fr(Ac, K), a daughter of 227Ac, has a half-life of 21.8
min. This is the only isotope of francium occurring in nature. Because all known isotopes of francium are highly unstable, knowledge of the chemical
properties of this element comes from radiochemical techniques. No weighable quantity of the element has been prepared or isolated. The chemical
properties of francium most closely resemble cesium. In 1996, researchers Orozco, Sprouse, and co-workers at the State University of New York, Stony
Brook, reported that they had produced francium atoms by bombarding 18O atoms at  a gold target heated almost to its melting point. Collisions between
gold and oxygen nuclei created atoms of francium-210 which had 87 protons and123 neutrons. This team reported they had generated about 1 million
francium-210 ions per second and held 1000 or more atoms at a time for about 20 secs. in a magnetic trap they had devised before the atoms decayed
or escaped. Enough francium was trapped so that a video camera could capture the light given off by the atoms as they fluoresced. A cluster of about


--- PAGE 715 ---
TeamLRN
THE ELEMENTS (continued)
4-13
10,000 francium atoms appeared as a glowing sphere about 1 mm in diameter. It is thought that the francium atoms could serve as miniature laboratoires
for probing interactions between electrons and quarks.
Gadolinium — (gadolinite, a mineral named for Gadolin, a Finnish chemist), Gd; at. wt. 157.25(3); at. no. 64; m.p. 1313°C; b.p. 3273°C; sp. gr.
7.901 (25°C); valence 3. Gadolinia, the oxide of gadolinium, was separated by Marignac in 1880 and Lecoq de Boisbaudran independently isolated
the element from Mosander’s “yttria” in 1886. The element was named for the mineral gadolinite from which this rare earth was originally obtained.
Gadolinium is found in several other minerals, including monazite and bastnasite, which are of commercial importance. The element has been isolated
only in recent years. With the development of ion-exchange and solvent extraction techniques, the availability and price of gadolinium and the other
rare-earth metals have greatly improved. Thirty-one isotopes and isomers of gadolinium are now recognized; seven are stable and occur naturally. The
metal can be prepared by the reduction of the anhydrous fluoride with metallic calcium. As with other related rare-earth metals, it is silvery white, has
a metallic luster, and is malleable and ductile. At room temperature, gadolinium crystallizes in the hexagonal, close-packed α form. Upon heating to
1235°C, α gadolinium transforms into the β form, which has a body-centered cubic structure. The metal is relatively stable in dry air, but in moist air
it tarnishes with the formation of a loosely adhering oxide film which spalls off and exposes more surface to oxidation. The metal reacts slowly with
water and is soluble in dilute acid. Gadolinium has the highest thermal neutron capture cross-section of any known element (49,000 barns). Natural
gadolinium is a mixture of seven isotopes. Two of these, 155Gd and 157Gd, have excellent capture characteristics, but they are present naturally in low
concentrations. As a result, gadolinium has a very fast burnout rate and has limited use as a nuclear control rod material. It has been used in making
gadolinium yttrium garnets, which have microwave applications. Compounds of gadolinium are used in making phosphors for color TV tubes. The
metal has unusual superconductive properties. As little as 1% gadolinium has been found to improve the workability and resistance of iron, chromium,
and related alloys to high temperatures and oxidation. Gadolinium ethyl sulfate has extremely low noise characteristics and may find use in duplicating
the performance of amplifiers, such as the maser. The metal is ferromagnetic. Gadolinium is unique for its high magnetic moment and for its special
Curie temperature (above which ferromagnetism vanishes) lying just at room temperature. This suggests uses as a magnetic component that senses
hot and cold. The price of the metal is about $5/g (99.9% purity).
Gallium — (L. Gallia, France; also from Latin, gallus, a translation of Lecoq, a cock), Ga; at. wt. 69.723(1); at. no. 31; m.p. 29.76°C; b.p. 2204°C;
sp. gr. 5.904 (29.6°C) solid; sp. gr. 6.095 (29.6°C) liquid; valence 2 or 3. Predicted and described by Mendeleev as ekaaluminum, and discovered
spectroscopically by Lecoq de Boisbaudran in 1875, who in the same year obtained the free metal by electrolysis of a solution of the hydroxide in KOH.
Gallium is often found as a trace element in diaspore, sphalerite, germanite, bauxite, and coal. Some flue dusts from burning coal have been shown
to contain as much as 1.5% gallium. It is the only metal, except for mercury, cesium, and rubidium, which can be liquid near room temperatures; this
makes possible its use in high-temperature thermometers. It has one of the longest liquid ranges of any metal and has a low vapor pressure even at high
temperatures. There is a strong tendency for gallium to supercool below its freezing point. Therefore, seeding may be necessary to initiate solidification.
Ultra-pure gallium has a beautiful, silvery appearance, and the solid metal exhibits a conchoidal fracture similar to glass. The metal expands 3.1% on
solidifying; therefore, it should not be stored in glass or metal containers, as they may break as the metal solidifies. Gallium wets glass or porcelain,
and forms a brilliant mirror when it is painted on glass. It is widely used in doping semiconductors and producing solid-state devices such as transistors.
High-purity gallium is attacked only slowly by mineral acids. Magnesium gallate containing divalent impurities such as Mn+2 is finding use in
commercial ultraviolet activated powder phosphors. Gallium nitride has been used to produce blue light-emitting diodes. Blue LED’s used in compact
disc applications can be used to store a 2-hr movie, for example, on one 5-in. diameter disc. Extensive use of gallium has found recent application in
the Gallex Detector Experiment located in the Gran Sasso Underground Laboratory in Italy. This underground facility has been built by the Italian
Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare in the middle of a highway tunnel through the Abruzzese mountains, about 150 km east of Rome. The experiment
is shielded by a 3300-m water-equivalent of rock. In this experiment, 30.3 tons of gallium in the form of 110 tons of GaCl3-HCl solution are being
used to detect solar neutrinos. The production of 71Ge from gallium is being measured.Gallium arsenide is capable of converting electricity directly
into coherent light. Gallium readily alloys with most metals, and has been used as a component in low-melting alloys. Its toxicity appears to be of a
low order, but should be handled with care until more data are forthcoming. Natural gallium contains two stable isotopes. Twenty-six other isotopes,
one of which is an isomer, are known. The metal can be supplied in ultrapure form (99.99999+%). The cost is about $5/g (99.999%).
Germanium — (L. Germania, Germany), Ge; at. wt. 72.61(2); at. no. 32; m.p. 938.25°C; b.p. 2833°C; sp. gr. 5.323 (25°C); valence 2 and 4.
Predicted by Mendeleev in 1871 as ekasilicon, and discovered by Winkler in 1886. The metal is found in argyrodite, a sulfide of germanium and silver;
in germanite, which contains 8% of the element; in zinc ores; in coal; and in other minerals. The element is frequently obtained commercially from
flue dusts of smelters processing zinc ores, and has been recovered from the by-products of combustion of certain coals. Its presence in coal insures
a large reserve of the element in the years to come. Germanium can be separated from other metals by fractional distillation of its volatile tetrachloride.
The tetrachloride may then be hydrolyzed to give GeO2; the dioxide can be reduced with hydrogen to give the metal. Recently developed zone-refining
techniques permit the production of germanium of ultra-high purity. The element is a gray-white metalloid, and in its pure state is crystalline and brittle,
retaining its luster in air at room temperature. It is a very important semiconductor material. Zone-refining techniques have led to production of
crystalline germanium for semiconductor use with an impurity of only one part in 1010. Doped with arsenic, gallium, or other elements, it is used as
a transistor element in thousands of electronic applications. Its application in fiber optics and infra-red optical systems now provides the largest use
for germanium. Germanium is also finding many other applications including use as an alloying agent, as a phosphor in fluorescent lamps, and as a
catalyst. Germanium and germanium oxide are transparent to the infrared and are used in infrared spectroscopes and other optical equipment, including
extremely sensitive infrared detectors. Germanium oxide’s high index of refraction and dispersion has made it useful as a component of glasses used
in wide-angle camera lenses and microscope objectives. The field of organogermanium chemistry is becoming increasingly important. Certain
germanium compounds have a low mammalian toxicity, but a marked activity against certain bacteria, which makes them of interest as
chemotherapeutic agents. The cost of germanium is about $10/g (99.999% purity). Thirty isotopes and isomers are known, five of which occur
naturally.
Gold — (Sanskrit Jval; Anglo-Saxon gold), Au (L. aurum, gold); at. wt. 196.96654(3); at. no. 79; m.p. 1064.18°C; b.p. 2856°C; sp. gr. ~19.3
(20°C); valence 1 or 3. Known and highly valued from earliest times, gold is found in nature as the free metal and in tellurides; it is very widely
distributed and is almost always associated with quartz or pyrite. It occurs in veins and alluvial deposits, and is often separated from rocks and other
minerals by sluicing and panning operations. About 25% of the world’s gold output comes from South Africa, and about two thirds of the total U.S.
production now comes from South Dakota and Nevada. The metal is recovered from its ores by cyaniding, amalgamating, and smelting processes.


--- PAGE 717 ---
TeamLRN
THE ELEMENTS (continued)
4-15
detected spectroscopically in great abundance, especially in the hotter stars, and it is an important component in both the proton-proton reaction and
the carbon cycle, which account for the energy of the sun and stars. The fusion of hydrogen into helium provides the energy of the hydrogen bomb.
The helium content of the atmosphere is about 1 part in 200,000. It is present in various radioactive minerals as a decay product. Much of the  world’s
supply of helium is obtained from wells in Texas, Colorado, and Kansas. The only other known helium extraction plants, outside the United States,
in 1999 were in Poland, Russia, China, Algeria, and India. The cost of helium has fallen from $2500/ft3 in 1915 to about 2.5¢/cu.ft. (.028 cu meters)
in 1999. Helium has the lowest melting point of any element and has found wide use in cryogenic research, as its boiling point is close to absolute zero.
Its use in the study of superconductivity is vital. Using liquid helium, Kurti and co-workers, and others, have succeeded in obtaining temperatures of
a few microkelvins by the adiabatic demagnetization of copper nuclei, starting from about 0.01 K. Liquid helium (He4) exists in two forms: He4I and
He4II, with a sharp transition point at 2.174 K (3.83 cm Hg). He4I (above this temperature) is a normal liquid, but He4II (below it) is unlike any other
known substance. It expands on cooling; its conductivity for heat is enormous; and neither its heat conduction nor viscosity obeys normal rules. It has
other peculiar properties. Helium is the only liquid that cannot be solidified by lowering the temperature. It remains liquid down to absolute zero at
ordinary pressures, but it can readily be solidified by increasing the pressure. Solid 3He and 4He are unusual in that both can readily be changed in volume
by more than 30% by application of pressure. The specific heat of helium gas is unusually high. The density of helium vapor at the normal boiling
point is also very high, with the vapor expanding greatly when heated to room temperature. Containers filled with helium gas at 5 to 10 K should be
treated as though they contained liquid helium due to the large increase in pressure resulting from warming the gas to room temperature. While helium
normally has a 0 valence, it seems to have a weak tendency to combine with certain other elements. Means of preparing helium diflouride have been
studied, and species such as HeNe and the molecular ions He+ and He++ have been investigated. Helium is widely used as an inert gas shield for arc
welding; as a protective gas in growing silicon and germanium crystals, and in titanium and zirconium production; as a cooling medium for nuclear
reactors, and as a gas for supersonic wind tunnels. A mixture of helium and oxygen is used as an artificial atmosphere for divers and others working
under pressure. Different ratios of He/O2 are used for different depths at which the diver is operating. Helium is extensively used for filling balloons
as it is a much safer gas than hydrogen. One of the recent largest uses for helium has been for pressuring liquid fuel rockets. A Saturn booster such
as used on the Apollo lunar missions required about 13 million ft3of helium for a firing, plus more for checkouts. Liquid helium’s use in magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) continues to increase as the medical profession accepts and develops new uses for the equipment. This equipment is providing
accurate diagnoses of problems where exploratory surgery has previously been required to determine problems. Another medical application that is
being developed uses MRI to determine by blood analysis whether a patient has any form of cancer. Lifting gas applications are increasing. Various
companies in addition to Goodyear, are now using “blimps” for advertising. The Navy and the Air Force are investigating the use of airships to provide
early warning systems to detect low-flying cruise missiles. The Drug Enforcement Agency has used radar-equipped blimps to detect drug smugglers
along the southern border of the U.S. In addition, NASA is currently using helium-filled balloons to sample the atmosphere in Antarctica to determine
what is depleting the ozone layer that protects Earth from harmful U.V. radiation. Research on and development of materials which become
superconductive at temperatures well above the boiling point of helium could have a major impact on the demand for helium. Less costly refrigerants
having boiling points considerably higher could replace the present need to cool such superconductive materials to the boiling point of helium. Natural
helium contains two stable isotopes 3He and 4He. 3He is present in very small quantities. Six other isotopes of helium are now recognized.
Holmium — (L. Holmia , for Stockholm), Ho; at. wt. 164.93032(2); at. no 67; m.p. 1474°C; b.p. 2700°C; sp. gr. 8.795 (25°C); valence + 3. The
spectral absorption bands of holmium were noticed in 1878 by the Swiss chemists Delafontaine and Soret, who announced the existence of an “Element
X”. Cleve, of Sweden, later independently discovered the element while working on erbia earth. The element is named after Cleve’s native city. Pure
holmia, the yellow oxide, was prepared by Homberg in 1911. Holmium occurs in gadolinite, monazite, and in other rare-earth minerals. It is
commercially obtained from monazite, occurring in that mineral to the extent of about 0.05%. It has been isolated by the reduction of its anhydrous
chloride or fluoride with calcium metal. Pure holmium has a metallic to bright silver luster. It is relatively soft and malleable, and is stable in dry air
at room temperature, but rapidly oxidizes in moist air and at elevated temperatures. The metal has unusual magnetic properties. Few uses have yet been
found for the element. The element, as with other rare earths, seems to have a low acute toxic rating. Natural holmium consists of one isotope 165Ho,
which is not radioactive. Holmium has 49 other isotopes known, all of which are radioactive. The price of 99.9% holmium metal is about $20/g.
Hydrogen — (Gr. hydro, water, and genes, forming), H; at. wt. 1.00794(7); at. no. 1; m.p. –259.34°C; b.p. –252.87°C; tc -240.18; density 0.08988
g/l; density (liquid) 70.8 g/l (–253°C); density (solid) 70.6 g/l (–262°C); valence 1. Hydrogen was prepared many years before it was recognized as
a distinct substance by Cavendish in 1766. It was named by Lavoisier. Hydrogen is the most abundant of all elements in the universe, and it is thought
that the heavier elements were, and still are, being built from hydrogen and helium. It has been estimated that hydrogen makes up more than 90% of
all the atoms or three quarters of the mass of the universe. It is found in the sun and most stars, and plays an important part in the proton-proton reaction
and carbon-nitrogen cycle, which accounts for the energy of the sun and stars. It is thought that hydrogen is a major component of the planet Jupiter
and that at some depth in the planet’s interior the pressure is so great that solid molecular hydrogen is converted into solid metallic hydrogen. In 1973,
it was reported that a group of Russian experimenters may have produced metallic hydrogen at a pressure of 2.8 Mbar. At the transition the density
changed from 1.08 to 1.3 g/cm3. Earlier, in 1972, a Livermore (California) group also reported on a similar experiment in which they observed a
pressure-volume point centered at 2 Mbar. It has been predicted that metallic hydrogen may be metastable; others have predicted it would be a
superconductor at room temperature. On earth, hydrogen occurs chiefly in combination with oxygen in water, but it is also present in organic matter
such as living plants, petroleum, coal, etc. It is present as the free element in the atmosphere, but only to the extent of less than 1 ppm by volume. It
is the lightest of all gases, and combines with other elements, sometimes explosively, to form compounds. Great quantities of hydrogen are required
commercially for the fixation of nitrogen from the air in the Haber ammonia process and for the hydrogenation of fats and oils. It is also used in large
quantities in methanol production, in hydrodealkylation, hydrocracking, and hydrodesulfurization. It is also used as a rocket fuel, for welding, for
production of hydrochloric acid, for the reduction of metallic ores, and for filling balloons. The lifting power of 1 ft3 of hydrogen gas is about 0.076
lb at 0°C, 760 mm pressure. Production of hydrogen in the U.S. alone now amounts to about 3 billion cubic feet per year. It is prepared by the action
of steam on heated carbon, by decomposition of certain hydrocarbons with heat, by the electrolysis of water, or by the displacement from acids by certain
metals. It is also produced by the action of sodium or potassium hydroxide on aluminum. Liquid hydrogen is important in cryogenics and in the study
of superconductivity, as its melting point is only a 20°C above absolute zero. Hydrogen consists of three isotopes, most of which is 1H. The ordinary
isotope of hydrogen,  H, is known as protium. In 1932, Urey announced the discovery of a stable isotope, deuterium (2H or D) with an atomic weight
of 2. Deuterium is present in natural hydrogen to the extent of 0.015%. Two years later an unstable isotope, tritium (3H), with an atomic weight of 3


--- PAGE 718 ---
THE ELEMENTS (continued)
4-16
was discovered. Tritium has a half-life of about 12.32 years. Tritium atoms are also present in natural hydrogen but in much smaller proportion. Tritium
is readily produced in nuclear reactors and is used in the production of the hydrogen bomb. It is also used as a radioactive agent in making luminous
paints, and as a tracer. On August 27, 2001 Russian, French, and Japanese physicists working at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research near Moscow
reported they had made “super-heavy hydrogen”, which had a nucleus with one proton and four neutrons. Using an accelerator, they used a beam of
helium-6 nuclei to strike a hydrogen target, which resulted in the occasional production of a hydrogen-5 nucleus plus a helium-2 nucleus. These unstable
particles quickly disintegrated. This resulted in two protons from the He-2, a triton, and two neutrons from the H-5 breakup. Deuterium gas is readily
available, without permit, at about $1/l. Heavy water, deuterium oxide (D2O), which is used as a moderator to slow down neutrons, is available without
permit at a cost of 6c to $1/g, depending on quantity and purity. About 1000 tons (4,400,000 kg) of deuterium oxide (heavy water) are now in use at
the Sudbury (Ontario) Neutrino Observatory. This observatory is taking data to provide new revolutionary insight into the properties of neutrinos and
into the core of the sun. The heavy water is on loan from Atomic Energy of Canada, Ltd. (AECL). The observatory and detectors are located 6800
ft (2072 m) deep in the Creighton mine of the International Nickel Co., near Sudbury. The heavy water is contained in an acrylic vessel, 12 m in diameter.
Neutrinos react with the heavy water to produce Cherenkov radiation. This light is then detected with 9600 photomultiplier tubes surrounding the vessel.
The detector laboratory is immensely clean to reduce background radiation, which otherwise hide the very weak signals from neutrinos. Quite apart
from isotopes, it has been shown that hydrogen gas under ordinary conditions is a mixture of two kinds of molecules, known as ortho- and para-
hydrogen, which differ from one another by the spins of their electrons and nuclei. Normal hydrogen at room temperature contains 25% of the para
form and 75% of the ortho form. The ortho form cannot be prepared in the pure state. Since the two forms differ in energy, the physical properties
also differ. The melting and boiling points of parahydrogen are about 0.1°C lower than those of normal hydrogen. Consideration is being given to an
entire economy based on solar- and nuclear-generated hydrogen. Located in remote regions, power plants would electrolyze sea water; the hydrogen
produced would travel to distant cities by pipelines. Pollution-free hydrogen could replace natural gas, gasoline, etc., and could serve as a reducing
agent in metallurgy, chemical processing, refining, etc. It could also be used to convert trash into methane and ethylene. Public acceptance, high capital
investment, and the high present cost of hydrogen with respect to present fuels are but a few of the problems facing establishment of such an economy.
Hydrogen is being investigated as a substitute for deep-sea diving applications below 300 m. Hydrogen is readily available from air product suppliers.
Indium — (from the brilliant indigo line in its spectrum),In; at. wt. 114.818(3); at. no. 49; m.p. 156.60°C; b.p. 2072°C; sp. gr. 7.31 (20°C); valence
1, 2, or 3. Discovered by Reich and Richter, who later isolated the metal. Indium is most frequently associated with zinc materials, and it is from these
that most commercial indium is now obtained; however, it is also found in iron, lead, and copper ores. Until 1924, a gram or so constituted the world’s
supply of this element in isolated form. It is probably about as abundant as silver. About 4 million troy ounces of indium are now produced annually
in the Free World. Canada is presently producing more than 1,000,000 troy ounces annually. The present cost of indium is about $2 to $10/g, depending
on quantity and purity. It is available in ultrapure form. Indium is a very soft, silvery-white metal with a brilliant luster. The pure metal gives a high-
pitched “cry” when bent. It wets glass, as does gallium. It has found application in making low-melting alloys; an alloy of 24% indium-76% gallium
is liquid at room temperature. Indium is used in making bearing alloys, germanium transistors, rectifiers, thermistors, liquid crystal displays, high
definition television, batteries, and photoconductors. It can be plated onto metal and evaporated onto glass, forming a mirror as good as that made with
silver but with more resistance to atmospheric corrosion. There is evidence that indium has a low order of toxicity; however, care should be taken until
further information is available. Seventy isotopes and isomers are now recognized (more than any other element). Natural indium contains two isotopes.
One is stable. The other, 115In, comprising 95.71% of natural indium is slightly radioactive with a very long half-life.
Iodine — (Gr. iodes, violet), I; at. wt. 126.90447(3); at. no. 53; m.p. 113.7°C; b.p. 184.4°C; tc 546°C; density of the gas 11.27 g/l; sp. gr. solid
4.93 (20°C); valence 1, 3, 5, or 7. Discovered by Courtois in 1811. Iodine, a halogen, occurs sparingly in the form of iodides in sea water from which
it is assimilated by seaweeds, in Chilean saltpeter and nitrate-bearing earth, known as caliche in brines from old sea deposits, and in brackish waters
from oil and salt wells. Ultrapure iodine can be obtained from the reaction of potassium iodide with copper sulfate. Several other methods of isolating
the element are known. Iodine is a bluish-black, lustrous solid, volatilizing at ordinary temperatures into a blue-violet gas with an irritating odor; it
forms compounds with many elements, but is less active than the other halogens, which displace it from iodides. Iodine exhibits some metallic-like
properties. It dissolves readily in chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, or carbon disulfide to form beautiful purple solutions. It is only slightly soluble
in water. Iodine compounds are important in organic chemistry and very useful in medicine. Forty two isotopes and isomers are recognized. Only one
stable isotope, 127I is found in nature. The artificial radioisotope 131I, with a half-life of 8 days, has been used in treating the thyroid gland. The most
common compounds are the iodides of sodium and potassium (KI) and the iodates (KIO3). Lack of iodine is the cause of goiter. Iodides, and thyroxin
which contains iodine, are used internally in medicine, and a solution of KI and iodine in alcohol is used for external wounds. Potassium iodide finds
use in photography. The deep blue color with starch solution is characteristic of the free element. Care should be taken in handling and using iodine,
as contact with the skin can cause lesions; iodine vapor is intensely irritating to the eyes and mucous membranes. Elemental iodine costs about 25 to
75¢/g depending on purity and quantity.
Iridium — (L. iris, rainbow), Ir; at. wt. 192.217(3); at. no. 77; m.p. 2446°C; b.p. 4428°C; sp. gr. 22.42 (17°C); valence 3 or 4. Discovered in 1803
by Tennant in the residue left when crude platinum is dissolved by aqua regia. The name iridium is appropriate, for its salts are highly colored. Iridium,
a metal of the platinum family, is white, similar to platinum, but with a slight yellowish cast. It is very hard and brittle, making it very hard to machine,
form, or work. It is the most corrosion-resistant metal known, and was used in making the standard meter bar of Paris, which is a 90% platinum-10%
iridium alloy. This meter bar was replaced in 1960 as a fundamental unit of length (see under Krypton). Iridium is not attacked by any of the acids
nor by aqua regia, but is attacked by molten salts, such as NaCl and NaCN. Iridium occurs uncombined in nature with platinum and other metals of
this family in alluvial deposits. It is recovered as a by-product from the nickel mining industry. The largest reserves and production of the platinum
group of metals, which includes iridium, is in South Africa, followed by Russia and Canada. The U.S. has only one active mine, located at Nye, MT.
The presence of iridium has recently been used in examining the Cretaceous-Tertiary  (K-T) boundary. Meteorites contain small amounts of iridium.
Because iridium is found widely distributed at the K-T boundary, it has been suggested that a large meteorite or asteroid collided with the earth, killing
the dinosaurs, and creating a large dust cloud and crater. Searches for such a crater point to one in the Yucatan, known as Chicxulub. Iridium has found
use in making crucibles and apparatus for use at high temperatures. It is also used for electrical contacts. Its principal use is as a hardening agent for
platinum. With osmium, it forms an alloy which is used for tipping pens and compass bearings. The specific gravity of iridium is only very slightly
lower than that of osmium, which has been generally credited as being the heaviest known element. Calculations of the densities of iridium and osmium
from the space lattices gives values of 22.65 and 22.61 g/cm3, respectively. These values may be more reliable than actual physical measurements.


--- PAGE 719 ---
TeamLRN
THE ELEMENTS (continued)
4-17
At present, therefore, we know that either iridium or osmium is the densest known element, but the data do not yet allow selection between the two.
Natural iridium contains two stable isotopes. Forty-five other isotopes, all radioactive, are now recognized. Iridium (99.9%) costs about $100/g.
Iron — (Anglo-Saxon, iron), Fe (L. ferrum); at. wt. 55.845(2); at. no. 26; m.p. 1538°C; b.p. 2861°C; sp. gr. 7.874 (20°C); valence 2, 3, 4, or 6.
The use of iron is prehistoric. Genesis mentions that Tubal-Cain, seven generations from Adam, was “an instructor of every artificer in brass and iron.”
A remarkable iron pillar, dating to about A.D. 400, remains standing today in Delhi, India. This solid shaft of wrought iron is about 71/4 m high by 40
cm in diameter. Corrosion to the pillar has been minimal although it has been exposed to the weather since its erection. Iron is a relatively abundant
element in the universe. It is found in the sun and many types of stars in considerable quantity. Its nuclei are very stable. It has been suggested that
the iron we have here on earth may have originated in a supernova. Iron is a very difficult element to produce in ordinary nuclear reactions, such as
would take place in the sun. Iron is found native as a principal component of a class of iron-nickel meteorites known as siderites, and is a minor
constituent of the other two classes of meteorites. The core of the earth, 2150 miles in radius, is thought to be largely composed of iron with about 10%
occluded hydrogen. The metal is the fourth most abundant element, by weight, making up the crust of the earth. The most common ore is hematite
(Fe2O3). Magnetite (Fe3O4) is frequently seen as black sands along beaches and banks of streams. Lodestone is another form of magnetite. Taconite
is becoming increasingly important as a commercial ore. Iron is a vital constituent of plant and animal life, and appears in hemoglobin. The pure metal
is not often encountered in commerce, but is usually alloyed with carbon or other metals. The pure metal is very reactive chemically, and rapidly
corrodes, especially in moist air or at elevated temperatures. It has four allotropic forms, or ferrites, known as α, β, γ, and δ, with transition points at
700, 928, and 1530°C. The α form is magnetic, but when transformed into the β form, the magnetism disappears although the lattice remains unchanged.
The relations of these forms are peculiar. Pig iron is an alloy containing about 3% carbon with varying amounts of S, Si, Mn, and P. It is hard, brittle,
fairly fusible, and is used to produce other alloys, including steel. Wrought iron contains only a few tenths of a percent of carbon, is tough, malleable,
less fusible, and has usually a “fibrous” structure. Carbon steel is an alloy of iron with carbon, with small amounts of Mn, S, P, and Si. Alloy steels
are carbon steels with other additives such as nickel, chromium, vanadium, etc. Iron is the cheapest and most abundant, useful, and important of all
metals. Natural iron contains four isotopes and isomers. Twenty-six other isotopes and isomers, all radioactive, are now recognized.
Krypton — (Gr. kryptos, hidden), Kr; at. wt. 83.80(1); at. no. 36; m.p. –157.36°C; b.p. –153.22 ± 0.10°C; tc -63.74°C; density 3.733 g/l (0°C);
valence usually 0. Discovered in 1898 by Ramsay and Travers in the residue left after liquid air had nearly boiled away. Krypton is present in the air
to the extent of about 1 ppm. The atmosphere of Mars has been found to contain 0.3 ppm of krypton. It is one of the “noble” gases. It is characterized
by its brilliant green and orange spectral lines. Naturally occurring krypton contains six stable isotopes. Thirty other unstable isotopes and isomers
are now recognized. The spectral lines of krypton are easily produced and some are very sharp. In 1960 it was internationally agreed that the fundamental
unit of length, the meter, should be defined in terms of the orange-red spectral line of 86Kr. This replaced the standard meter of Paris, which was defined
in terms of a bar made of a platinum-iridium alloy. In October 1983 the meter, which originally was defined as being one ten millionth of a quadrant
of the earth’s polar circumference, was again redefined by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures as being the length of path traveled by
light in a vacuum during a time interval of 1/299,792,458 of a second. Solid krypton is a white crystalline substance with a face-centered cubic structure
which is common to all the “rare gases”. While krypton is generally thought of as a rare gas that normally does not combine with other elements to
form compounds, it now appears that the existence of some krypton compounds is established. Krypton difluoride has been prepared in gram quantities
and can be made by several methods. A higher fluoride of krypton and a salt of an oxyacid of krypton also have been reported. Molecule-ions of ArKr+
and KrH+ have been identified and investigated, and evidence is provided for the formation of KrXe or KrXe+. Krypton clathrates have been prepared
with hydroquinone and phenol. 85Kr has found recent application in chemical analysis. By imbedding the isotope in various solids, kryptonates are
formed. The activity of these kryptonates is sensitive to chemical reactions at the surface. Estimates of the concentration of reactants are therefore made
possible. Krypton is used in certain photographic flash lamps for high-speed photography. Uses thus far have been limited because of its high cost.
Krypton gas presently costs about $690/100 L.
Kurchatovium — See Rutherfordium.
Lanthanum — (Gr. lanthanein, to lie hidden), La; at. wt. 138.9055(2); at. no. 57; m.p. 918°C; b.p. 3464°C; sp. gr. 6.145 (25°C); valence 3.
Mosander in 1839 extracted a new earth lanthana, from impure cerium nitrate, and recognized the new element. Lanthanum is found in rare-earth
minerals such as cerite, monazite, allanite, and bastnasite. Monazite and bastnasite are principal ores in which lanthanum occurs in percentages up
to 25 and 38%, respectively. Misch metal, used in making lighter flints, contains about 25% lanthanum. Lanthanum was isolated in relatively pure
form in 1923. Ion-exchange and solvent extraction techniques have led to much easier isolation of the so-called “rare-earth” elements. The availability
of lanthanum and other rare earths has improved greatly in recent years. The metal can be produced by reducing the anhydrous fluoride with calcium.
Lanthanum is silvery white, malleable, ductile, and soft enough to be cut with a knife. It is one of the most reactive of the rare-earth metals. It oxidizes
rapidly when exposed to air. Cold water attacks lanthanum slowly, and hot water attacks it much more rapidly. The metal reacts directly with elemental
carbon, nitrogen, boron, selenium, silicon, phosphorus, sulfur, and with halogens. At 310°C, lanthanum changes from a hexagonal to a face-centered
cubic structure, and at 865°C it again transforms into a body-centered cubic structure. Natural lanthanum is mixture of two isotopes, one of which is
stable and one of which is radioactive with a very long half-life. Thirty other radioactive isotopes are recognized. Rare-earth compounds containing
lanthanum are extensively used in carbon lighting applications, especially by the motion picture industry for studio lighting and projection. This
application consumes about 25% of the rare-earth compounds produced. La2O3 improves the alkali resistance of glass, and is used in making special
optical glasses. Small amounts of lanthanum, as an additive, can be used to produce nodular cast iron. There is current interest in hydrogen sponge
alloys containing lanthanum. These alloys take up to 400 times their own volume of hydrogen gas, and the process is reversible. Heat energy is released
every time they do so; therefore these alloys have possibilities in energy conservation systems. Lanthanum and its compounds have a low to moderate
acute toxicity rating; therefore, care should be taken in handling them. The metal costs about $2/g (99.9%).
Lawrencium — (Ernest O. Lawrence [1901–1958], inventor of the cyclotron), Lr; at. no. 103; at. mass no. [262]; valence + 3(?). This member
of the 5f transition elements (actinide series) was discovered in March 1961 by A. Ghiorso, T. Sikkeland, A. E. Larsh, and R. M. Latimer.A 3-µg
californium target, consisting of a mixture of isotopes of mass number 249, 250, 251, and 252, was bombarded with either 10B or 11B. The electrically
charged transmutation nuclei recoiled with an atmosphere of helium and were collected on a thin copper conveyor tape which was then moved to place
collected atoms in front of a series of solid-state detectors. The isotope of element 103 produced in this way decayed by emitting an 8.6-MeV alpha
particle with a half-life of 8 s. In 1967, Flerov and associates of the Dubna Laboratory reported their inability to detect an alpha emitter with a half-
life of 8 s which was assigned by the Berkeley group to 257103. This assignment has been changed to 258Lr or 259Lr. In 1965, the Dubna workers found


--- PAGE 720 ---
THE ELEMENTS (continued)
4-18
a longer-lived lawrencium isotope, 256Lr, with a half-life of 35 s. In 1968, Ghiorso and associates at Berkeley were able to use a few atoms of this isotope
to study the oxidation behavior of lawrencium. Using solvent extraction techniques and working very rapidly, they extracted lawrencium ions from
a buffered aqueous solution into an organic solvent, completing each extraction in about 30 s. It was found that lawrencium behaves differently from
dipositive nobelium and more like the tripositive elements earlier in the actinide series. Ten isotopes of lawrencium are now recognized.
Lead — (Anglo-Saxon lead), Pb (L. plumbum); at. wt. 207.2(1); at. no. 82; m.p. 327.46°C; b.p. 1749°C; sp. gr. 11.35 (20°C); valence 2 or 4. Long
known, mentioned in Exodus. The alchemists believed lead to be the oldest metal and associated it with the planet Saturn. Native lead occurs in nature,
but it is rare. Lead is obtained chiefly from galena (PbS) by a roasting process. Anglesite (PbSO4), cerussite (PbCO3), and minim (Pb3O4) are other
common lead minerals. Lead is a bluish-white metal of bright luster, is very soft, highly malleable, ductile, and a poor conductor of electricity. It is
very resistant to corrosion; lead pipes bearing the insignia of Roman emperors, used as drains from the baths, are still in service. It is used in containers
for corrosive liquids (such as sulfuric acid) and may be toughened by the addition of a small percentage of antimony or other metals. Natural lead is
a mixture of four stable isotopes: 204Pb (1.4%), 206Pb (24.1%), 207Pb (22.1%), and 208Pb (52.4%). Lead isotopes are the end products of each of the
three series of naturally occurring radioactive elements: 206Pb for the uranium series, 207Pb for the actinium series, and 208Pb for the thorium series.
Forty-three other isotopes of lead, all of which are radioactive, are recognized. Its alloys include solder, type metal, and various antifriction metals.
Great quantities of lead, both as the metal and as the dioxide, are used in storage batteries. Lead is also used for cable covering, plumbing, and
ammunition. The metal is very effective as a sound absorber, is used as a radiation shield around X-ray equipment and nuclear reactors, and is used
to absorb vibration. Lead, alloyed with tin, is used in making organ pipes. White lead, the basic carbonate, sublimed white lead (PbSO4), chrome yellow
(PbCrO4), red lead (Pb3O4), and other lead compounds are used extensively in paints, although in recent years the use of lead in paints has been
drastically curtailed to eliminate or reduce health hazards. Lead oxide is used in producing fine “crystal glass” and “flint glass” of a high index of
refraction for achromatic lenses. The nitrate and the acetate are soluble salts. Lead salts such as lead arsenate have been used as insecticides, but their
use in recent years has been practically eliminated in favor of less harmful organic compounds. Care must be used in handling lead as it is a cumulative
poison. Environmental concern with lead poisoning has resulted in a national program to eliminate the lead tetraethyl in gasoline. The U.S.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has recommended that  industries limit airborne lead to 50 µgms/cu. meter. Lead is priced
at about 90¢/kg (99.9%).
Lithium — (Gr. lithos, stone), Li; at. wt. 6.941(2); at. no. 3; m.p. 180.5°C; b.p. 1342°C; sp. gr. 0.534 (20°C); valence 1. Discovered by Arfvedson
in 1817. Lithium is the lightest of all metals, with a density only about half that of water. It does not occur free in nature; combined it is found in small
amounts in nearly all igneous rocks and in the waters of many mineral springs. Lepidolite, spodumene, petalite, and amblygonite are the more important
minerals containing it. Lithium is presently being recovered from brines of Searles Lake, in California, and from Nevada, Chile, and Argentina. Large
deposits of spodumene are found in North Carolina. The metal is produced electrolytically from the fused chloride. Lithium is silvery in appearance,
much like Na and K, other members of the alkali metal series. It reacts with water, but not as vigorously as sodium. Lithium imparts a beautiful crimson
color to a flame, but when the metal burns strongly the flame is a dazzling white. Since World War II, the production of lithium metal and its compounds
has increased greatly. Because the metal has the highest specific heat of any solid element, it has found use in heat transfer applications; however, it
is corrosive and requires special handling. The metal has been used as an alloying agent, is of interest in synthesis of organic compounds, and has nuclear
applications. It ranks as a leading contender as a battery anode material as it has a high electrochemical potential. Lithium is used in special glasses
and ceramics. The glass for the 200-inch telescope at Mt. Palomar contains lithium as a minor ingredient. Lithium chloride is one of the most
hygroscopic materials known, and it, as well as lithium bromide, is used in air conditioning and industrial drying systems. Lithium stearate is used
as an all-purpose and high-temperature lubricant. Other lithium compounds are used in dry cells and storage batteries. Seven isotopes of lithium are
recognized. Natural lithium contains two isotopes. The metal is priced at about $1.50/g (99.9%).
Lutetium — (Lutetia, ancient name for Paris, sometimes called cassiopeium by the Germans), Lu; at. wt. 174.967(1); at. no. 71; m.p. 1663°C;
b.p. 3402°C; sp. gr. 9.841 (25°C); valence 3. In 1907, Urbain described a process by which Marignac’s ytterbium (1879) could be separated into the
two elements, ytterbium (neoytterbium)and lutetium. These elements were identical with “aldebaranium” and “cassiopeium,” independently
discovered by von Welsbach about the same time. Charles James of the University of New Hampshire also independently prepared the very pure oxide,
lutecia, at this time. The spelling of the element was changed from lutecium to lutetium in 1949. Lutetium occurs in very small amounts in nearly all
minerals containing yttrium, and is present in monazite to the extent of about 0.003%, which is a commercial source. The pure metal has been isolated
only in recent years and is one of the most difficult to prepare. It can be prepared by the reduction of anhydrous LuCl3 or LuF3 by an alkali or alkaline
earth metal. The metal is silvery white and relatively stable in air. While new techniques, including ion-exchange reactions, have been developed to
separate the various rare-earth elements, lutetium is still the most costly of all rare earths. It is priced at about $100/g (99.9%). 176Lu occurs naturally
(97.41%) with 175Lu (2.59%), which is radioactive with a very long half-life. It is radioactive with a half-life of about 4 × 1010 years. Lutetium has 50
isotopes and isomers that are now recognized. Stable lutetium nuclides, which emit pure beta radiation after thermal neutron activation, can be used
as catalysts in cracking, alkylation, hydrogenation, and polymerization. Virtually no other commercial uses have been found yet for lutetium. While
lutetium, like other rare-earth metals, is thought to have a low toxicity rating, it should be handled with care until more information is available.
Magnesium — (Magnesia, district in Thessaly) Mg; at. wt. 24.3050(6); at. no. 12; m.p. 650°C; b.p. 1090°C; sp. gr. 1.738 (20°C); valence 2.
Compounds of magnesium have long been known. Black recognized magnesium as an element in 1755. It was isolated by Davy in 1808, and prepared
in coherent form by Bussy in 1831. Magnesium is the eighth most abundant element in the earth’s crust. It does not occur uncombined, but is found
in large deposits in the form of magnesite, dolomite, and other minerals. The metal is now principally obtained in the U.S. by electrolysis of fused
magnesium chloride derived from brines, wells, and sea water. Magnesium is a light, silvery-white, and fairly tough metal. It tarnishes slightly in air,
and finely divided magnesium readily ignites upon heating in air and burns with a dazzling white flame. It is used in flashlight photography, flares,
and pyrotechnics, including incendiary bombs. It is one third lighter than aluminium, and in alloys is essential for airplane and missile contruction.
The metal improves the mechanical, fabrication, and welding characteristics of aluminum when used as an alloying agent. Magnesium is used in
producing nodular graphite in cast iron,and is used as an additive to conventional propellants. It is also used as a reducing agent in the production of
pure uranium and other metals from their salts. The hydroxide (milk of magnesia), chloride, sulfate (Epsom salts), and citrate are used in medicine.
Dead-burned magnesite is employed for refractory purposes such as brick and liners in furnaces and converters. Calcined magnesia is also used for
water treatment and in the manufacture of rubber, paper, etc. Organic magnesium compounds (Grignard’s reagents) are important. Magnesium is an
important element in both plant and animal life. Chlorophylls are magnesium-centered porphyrins. The adult daily requirement of magnesium is about


--- PAGE 721 ---
TeamLRN
THE ELEMENTS (continued)
4-19
300 mg/day, but this is affected by various factors. Great care should be taken in handling magnesium metal, especially in the finely divided state, as
serious fires can occur. Water should not be used on burning magnesium or on magnesium fires. Natural magnesium contains three isotopes. Twelve
other isotopes are recognized. Magnesium metal costs about $100/kg (99.8%).
Manganese — (L. magnes, magnet, from magnetic properties of pyrolusite; It. manganese, corrupt form of magnesia), Mn; at. wt. 54.938049(9);
at. no. 25; m.p. 1246°C; b.p. 2061°C; sp. gr. 7.21 to 7.44, depending on allotropic form; valence 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, or 7. Recognized by Scheele, Bergman,
and others as an element and isolated by Gahn in 1774 by reduction of the dioxide with carbon. Manganese minerals are widely distributed; oxides,
silicates, and carbonates are the most common. The discovery of large quantities of manganese nodules on the floor of the oceans holds promise as
a source of manganese. These nodules contain about 24% manganese together with many other elements in lesser abundance. Most manganese today
is obtained from ores found in the Ukraine, Brazil, Australia, Republic of So. Africa, Gabon, China, and India. Pyrolusite (MnO2) and rhodochrosite
(MnCO3) are among the most common manganese minerals. The metal is obtained by reduction of the oxide with sodium, magnesium, aluminum,
or by electrolysis. It is gray-white, resembling iron, but is harder and very brittle. The metal is reactive chemically, and decomposes cold water slowly.
Manganese is used to form many important alloys. In steel, manganese improves the rolling and forging qualities, strength, toughness, stiffness, wear
resistance, hardness, and hardenability. With aluminum and antimony, especially with small amounts of copper, it forms highly ferromagnetic alloys.
Manganese metal is ferromagnetic only after special treatment. The pure metal exists in four allotropic forms. The alpha form is stable at ordinary
temperature; gamma manganese, which changes to alpha at ordinary temperatures, is said to be flexible, soft, easily cut, and capable of being bent.
The dioxide (pyrolusite) is used as a depolarizer in dry cells, and is used to “decolorize” glass that is colored green by impurities of iron. Manganese
by itself colors glass an amethyst color, and is responsible for the color of true amethyst. The dioxide is also used in the preparation of oxygen and
chlorine, and in drying black paints. The permanganate is a powerful oxidizing agent and is used in quantitative analysis and in medicine. Manganese
is widely distributed throughout the animal kingdom. It is an important trace element and may be essential for utilization of vitamin B1. Twenty-seven
isotopes and isomers are known. Manganese metal (99.95%) is priced at about $800/kg. Metal of 99.6% purity is priced at about $80/kg.
Meitnerium — (named for Lise Meitner [1878–1968], Austrian-Swedish physicist and mathematician), Mt; at. wt [266]; at. no. 109. On August
29, 1992, Element 109 was made and identified by physicists at the Heavy Ion Research Laboratory (G.S.I.), Darmstadt, Germany, by bombarding
a target of 209Bi with accelerated nuclei of 58Fe. The production of Element 109 has been extremely small. It took a week of target bombardment (1011
nuclear encounters) to produce a single atom of 109. Oganessian and his team at Dubna in 1994 repeated the Darmstadt experiment using a tenfold
irradiation dose. One fission event from seven alpha decays of 109 was observed, thus indirectly confirming the existence of isotope 266109. In August
1997, the IUPAC adopted the name meitnerium for this element, honoring L. Meitner. Four isotopes of meitnerium are now recognized.
Mendelevium — (Dmitri Mendeleev [1834–1907]), Md; at. wt. (258); at. no. 101; m.p. 827°C; valence +2, +3. Mendelevium, the ninth
transuranium element of the actinide series to be discovered, was first identified by Ghiorso, Harvey, Choppin, Thompson, and Seaborg early in 1955
as a result of the bombardment of the isotope 253Es with helium ions in the Berkeley 60-inch cyclotron. The isotope produced was 256Md, which has
a half-life of 78 min. This first identification was notable in that 256Md was synthesized on a one-atom-at-a-time basis. Nineteen isotopes and isomers
are now recognized. 258Md has a half-life of 51.5 days. This isotope has been produced by the bombardment of an isotope of einsteinium with ions
of helium. It now appears possible that eventually enough 258Md can be made so that some of its physical properties can be determined. 256Md has
been used to elucidate some of the chemical properties of mendelevium in aqueous solution. Experiments seem to show that the element possesses
a moderately stable dipositive (II) oxidation state in addition to the tripositive (III) oxidation state,which is characteristic of actinide elements.
Mercury — (Planet Mercury), Hg (hydrargyrum, liquid silver); at. wt. 200.59(2); at. no. 80; t.p. –38.83°C; b.p. 356.73°C; tc 1447°C; sp. gr. 13.546
(20°C); valence 1 or 2. Known to ancient Chinese and Hindus; found in Egyptian tombs of 1500 B.C. Mercury is the only common metal liquid at
ordinary temperatures. It only rarely occurs free in nature. The chief ore is cinnabar (HgS). Spain and China produce about 75% of the world’s supply
of the metal. The commercial unit for handling mercury is the “flask,” which weighs 76 lb (34.46 kg). The metal is obtained by heating cinnabar in
a current of air and by condensing the vapor. It is a heavy, silvery-white metal; a rather poor conductor of heat, as compared with other metals, and
a fair conductor of electricity. It easily forms alloys with many metals, such as gold, silver, and tin, which are called amalgams. Its ease in amalgamating
with gold is made use of in the recovery of gold from its ores. The metal is widely used in laboratory work for making thermometers, barometers,
diffusion pumps, and many other instruments. It is used in making mercury-vapor lamps and advertising signs, etc. and is used in mercury switches
and other electrical apparatus. Other uses are in making pesticides, mercury cells for caustic soda and chlorine production, dental preparations,
antifouling paint, batteries, and catalysts. The most important salts are mercuric chloride HgCl2 (corrosive sublimate — a violent poison), mercurous
chloride Hg2Cl2(calomel, occasionally still used in medicine), mercury fulminate (Hg(ONC)2), a detonator widely used in explosives, and mercuric
sulfide (HgS, vermillion, a high-grade paint pigment). Organic mercury compounds are important. It has been found that an electrical discharge causes
mercury vapor to combine with neon, argon, krypton, and xenon. These products, held together with van der Waals’ forces, correspond to HgNe, HgAr,
HgKr, and HgXe. Mercury is a virulent poison and is readily absorbed through the respiratory tract, the gastrointestinal tract, or through unbroken skin.
It acts as a cumulative poison and dangerous levels are readily attained in air. Air saturated with mercury vapor at 20°C contains a concentration that
exceeds the toxic limit many times. The danger increases at higher temperatures. It is therefore important that mercury be handled with care. Containers
of mercury should be securely covered and spillage should be avoided. If it is necessary to heat mercury or mercury compounds, it should be done
in a well-ventilated hood. Methyl mercury is a dangerous pollutant and is now widely found in water and streams. The triple point of mercury,
–38.8344°C, is a fixed point on the International Temperature Scale (ITS-90). Mercury (99.98%) is priced at about $110/kg. Native mercury contains
seven isotopes. Thirty-six other isotopes and isomers are known.
Molybdenum — (Gr. molybdos, lead), Mo; at. wt. 95.94(1); at. no. 42; m.p. 2623°C; b.p. 4639°C; sp. gr. 10.22 (20°C); valence 2, 3, 4?, 5?, or
6. Before Scheele recognized molybdenite as a distinct ore of a new element in 1778, it was confused with graphite and lead ore. The metal was prepared
in an impure form in 1782 by Hjelm. Molybdenum does not occur native, but is obtained principally from molybdenite (MoS2). Wulfenite (PbMoO4)
and powellite (Ca(MoW)O4) are also minor commercial ores. Molybdenum is also recovered as a by-product of copper and tungsten mining operations.
The U.S., Canada, Chile, and China produce most of the world’s molybdenum ores. The metal is prepared from the powder made by the hydrogen
reduction of purified molybdic trioxide or ammonium molybdate. The metal is silvery white, very hard, but is softer and more ductile than tungsten.
It has a high elastic modulus, and only tungsten and tantalum, of the more readily available metals, have higher melting points. It is a valuable alloying
agent, as it contributes to the hardenability and toughness of quenched and tempered steels. It also improves the strength of steel at high temperatures.
It is used in certain nickel-based alloys, such as the “Hastelloys®” which are heat-resistant and corrosion-resistant to chemical solutions. Molybdenum


--- PAGE 722 ---
THE ELEMENTS (continued)
4-20
oxidizes at elevated temperatures. The metal has found recent application as electrodes for electrically heated glass furnaces and forehearths. The metal
is also used in nuclear energy applications and for missile and aircraft parts. Molybdenum is valuable as a catalyst in the refining of petroleum. It has
found application as a filament material in electronic and electrical applications. Molybdenum is an essential trace element in plant nutrition. Some
lands are barren for lack of this element in the soil. Molybdenum sulfide is useful as a lubricant, especially at high temperatures where oils would
decompose. Almost all ultra-high strength steels with minimum yield points up to 300,000 psi(lb/in.2) contain molybdenum in amounts from 0.25 to
8%. Natural molybdenum contains seven isotopes. Thirty other isotopes and isomers are known, all of which are radioactive. Molybdenum metal costs
about $1/g (99.999% purity). Molybdenum metal (99.9%) costs about $160/kg.
Neodymium — (Gr. neos, new, and didymos, twin), Nd; at. wt. 144.24(3); at. no. 60; m.p. 1021°C; b.p. 3074°C; sp. gr. 7.008 (25°C); valence 3.
In 1841, Mosander, extracted from cerite a new rose-colored oxide, which he believed contained a new element. He named the element didymium,
as it was an inseparable twin brother of lanthanum. In 1885 von Welsbach separated didymium into two new elemental components, neodymia and
praseodymia, by repeated fractionation of ammonium didymium nitrate. While the free metal is in misch metal, long known and used as a pyrophoric
alloy for light flints, the element was not isolated in relatively pure form until 1925. Neodymium is present in misch metal to the extent of about 18%.
It is present in the minerals monazite and bastnasite, which are principal sources of rare-earth metals. The element may be obtained by separating
neodymium salts from other rare earths by ion-exchange or solvent extraction techniques, and by reducing anhydrous halides such as NdF3 with calcium
metal. Other separation techniques are possible. The metal has a bright silvery metallic luster. Neodymium is one of the more reactive rare-earth metals
and quickly tarnishes in air, forming an oxide that spalls off and exposes metal to oxidation. The metal, therefore, should be kept under light mineral
oil or sealed in a plastic material. Neodymium exists in two allotropic forms, with a transformation from a double hexagonal to a body-centered cubic
structure taking place at 863°C. Natural neodymium is a mixture of seven isotopes, one of which has a very long half-life. Twenty seven other
radioactive isotopes and isomers are recognized. Didymium, of which neodymium is a component, is used for coloring glass to make welder’s goggles.
By itself, neodymium colors glass delicate shades ranging from pure violet through wine-red and warm gray. Light transmitted through such glass
shows unusually sharp absorption bands. The glass has been used in astronomical work to produce sharp bands by which spectral lines may be
calibrated. Glass containing neodymium can be used as a laser material to produce coherent light. Neodymium salts are also used as a colorant for
enamels. The element is also being used with iron and boron to produce extremely strong magnets having energy densities as high as 27 to 35 million
gauss oersteds. These are the most compact magnets commercially available. The price of the metal is about $4/g. Neodymium has a low-to-moderate
acute toxic rating. As with other rare earths, neodymium should be handled with care.
Neon — (Gr. neos, new), Ne; at. wt. 20.1797(6); at. no. 10; t.p. –248.59°C; b.p. –246.08°C; tc -228.7°C (1 atm); density of gas 0.89990 g/l (1 atm,
0°C); density of liquid at b.p. 1.207 g/cm3; valence 0. Discovered by Ramsay and Travers in 1898. Neon is a rare gaseous element present in the
atmosphere to the extent of 1 part in 65,000 of air. It is obtained by liquefaction of air and separated from the other gases by fractional distillation. Natural
neon is a mixture of three isotopes. Fourteen other unstable isotopes are known. It is very inert element; however, it is said to form a compound with
fluorine. It is still questionable if true compounds of neon exist, but evidence is mounting in favor of their existence. The following ions are known
from optical and mass spectrometric studies: Ne+, (NeAr)+, (NeH)+, and (HeNe+). Neon also forms an unstable hydrate. In a vacuum discharge tube,
neon glows reddish orange. Of all the rare gases, the discharge of neon is the most intense at ordinary voltages and currents. Neon is used in making
the common neon advertising signs, which accounts for its largest use. It is also used to make high-voltage indicators, lightning arrestors, wave meter
tubes, and TV tubes. Neon and helium are used in making gas lasers. Liquid neon is now commercially available and is finding important application
as an economical cryogenic refrigerant. It has over 40 times more refrigerating capacity per unit volume than liquid helium and more than three times
that of liquid hydrogen. It is compact, inert, and is less expensive than helium when it meets refrigeration requirements. Neon costs about $800/80 cu.
ft. (2265 l).
Neptunium — (Planet Neptune), Np; at. wt. (237); at. no. 93; m.p. 644°C;  sp. gr. 20.25 (20°C); valence 3, 4, 5, and 6. Neptunium was the first
synthetic transuranium element of the actinide series discovered; the isotope 239Np was produced by McMillan and Abelson in 1940 at Berkeley,
California, as the result of bombarding uranium with cyclotron-produced neutrons. The isotope 237Np (half-life of 2.14 × 106 years) is currently obtained
in gram quantities as a by-product from nuclear reactors in the production of plutonium. Twenty-three isotopes and isomers of neptunium are now
recognized. Trace quantities of the element are actually found in nature due to transmutation reactions in uranium ores produced by the neutrons which
are present. Neptunium is prepared by the reduction of NpF3 with barium or lithium vapor at about 1200°C. Neptunium metal has a silvery appearance,
is chemically reactive, and exists in at least three structural modifications: α-neptunium, orthorhombic, density 20.25 g/cm3, β-neptunium (above
280°C), tetragonal, density (313°C) 19.36 g/cm3; γ-neptunium (above 577°C), cubic, density (600°C) 18.0 g/cm3. Neptunium has four ionic oxidation
states in solution: Np+3 (pale purple), analogous to the rare earth ion Pm+3, Np+4 (yellow green); NpO+ (green blue); and NpO++ (pale pink). These latter
oxygenated species are in contrast to the rare earths which exhibit only simple ions of the (II), (III), and (IV) oxidation states in aqueous solution. The
element forms tri- and tetrahalides such as NpF3, NpF4, NpCl4, NpBr3, NpI3, and oxides of various compositions such as are found in the uranium-
oxygen system, including Np3O8 and NpO2.
Nickel — (Ger. Nickel, Satan or Old Nick’s and from kupfernickel, Old Nick’s copper), Ni; at. wt. 58.6934(2); at. no. 28; m.p. 1455°C; b.p. 2913°C;
sp. gr. 8.902 (25°C); valence 0, 1, 2, 3. Discovered by Cronstedt in 1751 in kupfernickel (niccolite). Nickel is found as a constituent in most meteorites
and often serves as one of the criteria for distinguishing a meteorite from other minerals. Iron meteorites, or siderites, may contain iron alloyed with
from 5 to nearly 20% nickel. Nickel is obtained commercially from pentlandite and pyrrhotite of the Sudbury region of Ontario, a district that produces
much of the world’s nickel. It is now thought that the Sudbury deposit is the result of an ancient meteorite impact. Large deposits of nickel, cobalt,
and copper have recently been developed at Voisey’s Bay, Laborador. Other deposits of nickel are found in Russia, New Caledonia, Australia, Cuba,
Indonesia, and elsewhere. Nickel is silvery white and takes on a high polish. It is hard, malleable, ductile, somewhat ferromagnetic, and a fair conductor
of heat and electricity. It belongs to the iron-cobalt group of metals and is chiefly valuable for the alloys it forms. It is extensively used for making
stainless steel and other corrosion-resistant alloys such as Invar®, Monel®, Inconel®, and the Hastelloys®. Tubing made of a copper-nickel alloy is
extensively used in making desalination plants for converting sea water into fresh water. Nickel is also now used extensively in coinage and in making
nickel steel for armor plate and burglar-proof vaults, and is a component in Nichrome®, Permalloy®, and constantan. Nickel added to glass gives a
green color. Nickel plating is often used to provide a protective coating for other metals, and finely divided nickel is a catalyst for hydrogenating
vegetable oils. It is also used in ceramics, in the manufacture of Alnico magnets, and in the Edison® storage battery. The sulfate and the oxides are


--- PAGE 726 ---
THE ELEMENTS (continued)
4-24
polonium may now be prepared this way, by using the high neutron fluxes of nuclear reactors. Polonium-210 is a low-melting, fairly volatile metal,
50% of which is vaporized in air in 45 hours at 55°C. It is an alpha emitter with a half-life of 138.39 days. A milligram emits as many alpha particles
as 5 g of radium. The energy released by its decay is so large (140 W/g) that a capsule containing about half a gram reaches a temperature above 500°C.
The capsule also presents a contact gamma-ray dose rate of 0.012 Gy/h. A few curies (1 curie = 3.7 × 1010 Bq) of polonium exhibit a blue glow, caused
by excitation of the surrounding gas. Because almost all alpha radiation is stopped within the solid source and its container, giving up its energy,
polonium has attracted attention for uses as a lightweight heat source for thermoelectric power in space satellites. Thirty-eight isotopes and isomers
of polonium are known, with atomic masses ranging from 192 to 218. All are radioactive. Polonium-210 is the most readily available. Isotopes of mass
209 (half-life 102 years) and mass 208 (half-life 2.9 years) can be prepared by alpha, proton, or deuteron bombardment of lead or bismuth in a cyclotron,
but these are expensive to produce. Metallic polonium has been prepared from polonium hydroxide and some other polonium compounds in the
presence of concentrated aqueous or anhydrous liquid ammonia. Two allotropic modifications are known to exist. Polonium is readily dissolved in
dilute acids, but is only slightly soluble in alkalis. Polonium salts of organic acids char rapidly; halide amines are reduced to the metal. Polonium can
be mixed or alloyed with beryllium to provide a source of neutrons. It has been used in devices for eliminating static charges in textile mills, etc.;
however, beta sources are more commonly used and are less dangerous. It is also used on brushes for removing dust from photographic films. The
polonium for these is carefully sealed and controlled, minimizing hazards to the user. Polonium-210 is very dangerous to handle in even milligram
or microgram amounts, and special equipment and strict control is necessary. Damage arises from the complete absorption of the energy of the alpha
particle into tissue. The maximum permissible body burden for ingested polonium is only 0.03 µCi, which represents a particle weighing only 6.8 ×
10–12 g. Weight for weight it is about 2.5 × 1011 times as toxic as hydrocyanic acid. The maximum allowable concentration for soluble polonium
compounds in air is about 2 × 1011 µCi/cm3. Polonium-209 is available on special order from the Oak Ridge National Laboratory at a cost of $3600/µCi
plus packing costs..
Potassium — (English, potash — pot ashes; L. kalium, Arab. qali, alkali), K; at. wt. 39.0983(1); at. no. 19; m.p. 63.38°C; b.p. 759°C; sp. gr. 0.862
(20°C); valence 1. Discovered in 1807 by Davy, who obtained it from caustic potash (KOH); this was the first metal isolated by electrolysis. The metal
is the seventh most abundant and makes up about 2.4% by weight of the earth’s crust. Most potassium minerals are insoluble and the metal is obtained
from them only with great difficulty. Certain minerals, however, such as sylvite, carnallite, langbeinite, and polyhalite are found in ancient lake and
sea beds and form rather extensive deposits from which potassium and its salts can readily be obtained. Potash is mined in Germany, New Mexico,
California, Utah, and elsewhere. Large deposits of potash, found at a depth of some 1000 m in Saskatchewan, promise to be important in coming years.
Potassium is also found in the ocean, but is present only in relatively small amounts, compared to sodium. The greatest demand for potash has been
in its use for fertilizers. Potassium is an essential constituent for plant growth and it is found in most soils. Potassium is never found free in nature,
but is obtained by electrolysis of the hydroxide, much in the same manner as prepared by Davy. Thermal methods also are commonly used to produce
potassium (such as by reduction of potassium compounds with CaC2, C, Si, or Na). It is one of the most reactive and electropositive of metals. Except
for lithium, it is the lightest known metal. It is soft, easily cut with a knife, and is silvery in appearance immediately after a fresh surface is exposed.
It rapidly oxidizes in air and should be preserved in a mineral oil. As with other metals of the alkali group, it decomposes in water with the evolution
of hydrogen. It catches fire spontaneously on water. Potassium and its salts impart a violet color to flames. Twenty one isotopes, one of which is an
isomer,  of potassium are known. Ordinary potassium is composed of three isotopes, one of which is 40K (0.0117%), a radioactive isotope with a half-
life of 1.26 × 109 years. The radioactivity presents no appreciable hazard. An alloy of sodium and potassium (NaK) is used as a heat-transfer medium.
Many potassium salts are of utmost importance, including the hydroxide, nitrate, carbonate, chloride, chlorate, bromide, iodide, cyanide, sulfate,
chromate, and dichromate. Metallic potassium is available commercially for about $1200/kg (98% purity) or $75/g (99.95% purity).
Praseodymium — (Gr. prasios, green, and didymos, twin), Pr; at. wt. 140.90765(2); at. no. 59; m.p. 931°C; b.p. 3520°C; sp. gr. 6.773; valence
3. In 1841 Mosander extracted the rare earth didymia from lanthana; in 1879, Lecoq de Boisbaudran isolated a new earth, samaria, from didymia
obtained from the mineral samarskite. Six years later, in 1885, von Welsbach separated didymia into two others, praseodymia and neodymia, which
gave salts of different colors. As with other rare earths, compounds of these elements in solution have distinctive sharp spectral absorption bands or
lines, some of which are only a few Angstroms wide. The element occurs along with other rare-earth elements in a variety of minerals. Monazite and
bastnasite are the two principal commercial sources of the rare-earth metals. Ion-exchange and solvent extraction techniques have led to much easier
isolation of the rare earths and the cost has dropped greatly in the past few years. Thirty-seven isotopes and isomers are now recognized. Praseodymium
can be prepared by several methods, such as by calcium reduction of the anhydrous chloride of fluoride. Misch metal, used in making cigarette lighters,
contains about 5% praseodymium metal. Praseodymium is soft, silvery, malleable, and ductile. It was prepared in relatively pure form in 1931. It is
somewhat more resistant to corrosion in air than europium, lanthanum, cerium, or neodymium, but it does develop a green oxide coating that spalls
off when exposed to air. As with other rare-earth metals it should be kept under a light mineral oil or sealed in plastic. The rare-earth oxides, including
Pr2O3, are among the most refractory substances known. Along with other rare earths, it is widely used as a core material for carbon arcs used by the
motion picture industry for studio lighting and projection. Salts of praseodymium are used to color glasses and enamels; when mixed with certain other
materials, praseodymium produces an intense and unusually clean yellow color in glass. Didymium glass, of which praseodymium is a component,
is a colorant for welder’s goggles. The metal (99.9% pure) is priced at about $4/g.
Promethium — (Prometheus, who, according to mythology, stole fire from heaven), Pm; at. no. 61; at. wt. (145); m.p. 1042°C; b.p. 3000°C (est.);
sp. gr. 7.264 (25°C); valence 3. In 1902 Branner predicted the existence of an element between neodymium and samarium, and this was confirmed
by Moseley in 1914. Unsuccessful searches were made for this predicted element over two decades, and various investigators proposed the names
“illinium”, “florentium”, and “cyclonium” for this element. In 1941, workers at Ohio State University irradiated neodymium and praseodymium with
neutrons, deuterons, and alpha particles, resp., and produced several new radioactivities, which most likely were those of element 61. Wu and Segre,
and Bethe, in 1942, confirmed the formation; however, chemical proof of the production of element 61 was lacking because of the difficulty in
separating the rare earths from each other at that time. In 1945, Marinsky, Glendenin, and Coryell made the first chemical identification by use of ion-
exchange chromatography. Their work was done by fission of uranium and by neutron bombardment of neodymium. These investigators named the
newly discovered element. Searches for the element on earth have been fruitless, and it now appears that promethium is completely missing from the
earth’s crust. Promethium, however, has been reported to be in the spectrum of the star HR465 in Andromeda. This element is being formed recently
near the star’s surface, for no known isotope of promethium has a half-life longer than 17.7 years. Thirty five isotopes and isomers of promethium,
with atomic masses from 130 to 158 are now known. Promethium-145,with a half-life of 17.7 years, is the most useful. Promethium-145 has a specific


--- PAGE 728 ---
THE ELEMENTS (continued)
4-26
Rhenium — (L. Rhenus, Rhine), Re; at. wt. 186.207(1); at. no. 75; m.p. 3186°C; b.p. 5596°C; sp. gr. 21.02 (20°C); valence –1, +1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7. Discovery of rhenium is generally attributed to Noddack, Tacke, and Berg, who announced in 1925 they had detected the element in platinum ores
and columbite. They also found the element in gadolinite and molybdenite. By working up 660 kg of molybdenite they were able in 1928 to extract
1 g of rhenium. The price in 1928 was $10,000/g. Rhenium does not occur free in nature or as a compound in a distinct mineral species. It is, however,
widely spread throughout the earth’s crust to the extent of about 0.001 ppm. Commercial rhenium in the U.S. today is obtained from molybdenite
roaster-flue dusts obtained from copper-sulfide ores mined in the vicinity of Miami, Arizona, and elsewhere in Arizona and Utah. Some molybdenites
contain from 0.002 to 0.2% rhenium. It is estimated that in 1999 about 16,000 kg of rhenium was being produced. The total estimated world reserves
of rhenium is 11,000,000 kg. The total estimated Free World reserve of rhenium metal is 3500 tons. Natural rhenium is a mixture of two isotopes, one
of which has a very long half-life. Thirty nine other unstable isotopes are recognized. Rhenium metal is prepared by reducing ammonium perrhenate
with hydrogen at elevated temperatures. The element is silvery white with a metallic luster; its density is exceeded only by that of platinum, iridium,
and osmium, and its melting point is exceeded only by that of tungsten and carbon. It has other useful properties. The usual commercial form of the
element is a powder, but it can be consolidated by pressing and resistance-sintering in a vacuum or hydrogen atmosphere. This produces a compact
shape in excess of 90% of the density of the metal. Annealed rhenium is very ductile, and can be bent, coiled, or rolled. Rhenium is used as an additive
to tungsten and molybdenum-based alloys to impart useful properties. It is widely used for filaments for mass spectrographs and ion gages. Rhenium-
molybdenum alloys are superconductive at 10 K. Rhenium is also used as an electrical contact material as it has good wear resistance and withstands
arc corrosion. Thermocouples made of Re-W are used for measuring temperatures up to 2200°C, and rhenium wire has been used in photoflash lamps
for photography. Rhenium catalysts are exceptionally resistant to poisoning from nitrogen, sulfur, and phosphorus, and are used for hydrogenation
of fine chemicals, hydrocracking, reforming, and disproportionation of olefins. Rhenium has recently become especially important as a catalyst for
petroleum refining and in making super-alloys for jet engines. Rhenium costs about $16/g (99.99% pure). Little is known of its toxicity; therefore,
it should be handled with care until more data are available.
Rhodium — (Gr. rhodon, rose), Rh; at. wt. 102.90550(3); at. no. 45; m.p. 1964°C; b.p. 3695°C; sp. gr. 12.41 (20°C); valence 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6.
Wollaston discovered rhodium in 1803-4 in crude platinum ore he presumably obtained from South America. Rhodium occurs native with other
platinum metals in river sands of the Urals and in North and South America. It is also found with other platinum metals in the copper-nickel sulfide
ores of the Sudbury, Ontario region. Although the quantity occurring here is very small, the large tonnages of nickel processed make the recovery
commercially feasible. The annual world production of rhodium in 1999 was only about 9000 kg. The metal is silvery white and at red heat slowly
changes in air to the sesquioxide. At higher temperatures it converts back to the element. Rhodium has a higher melting point and lower density than
platinum. Its major use is as an alloying agent to harden platinum and palladium. Such alloys are used for furnace windings, thermocouple elements,
bushings for glass fiber production, electrodes for aircraft spark plugs, and laboratory crucibles. It is useful as an electrical contact material as it has
a low electrical resistance, a low and stable contact resistance, and is highly resistant to corrosion. Plated rhodium, produced by electroplating or
evaporation, is exceptionally hard and is used for optical instruments. It has a high reflectance and is hard and durable. Rhodium is also used for jewelry,
for decoration, and as a catalyst. Fifty-two isotopes and isomers are now known. Rhodium metal (powder) costs about $180/g (99.9%).
Rubidium — (L. rubidus, deepest red), Rb; at. wt. 85.4678(3); at. no. 37; m.p. 39.31°C; b.p. 688°C; sp. gr. (solid) 1.532 (20°C), (liquid) 1.475
(39°C); valence 1, 2, 3, 4. Discovered in 1861 by Bunsen and Kirchoff in the mineral lepidolite by use of the spectroscope. The element is much more
abundant than was thought several years ago. It is now considered to be the 16th most abundant element in the earth’s crust. Rubidium occurs in
pollucite, carnallite, leucite, and zinnwaldite, which contains traces up to 1%, in the form of the oxide. It is found in lepidolite to the extent of about
1.5%, and is recovered commercially from this source. Potassium minerals, such as those found at Searles Lake, California, and potassium chloride
recovered from brines in Michigan also contain the element and are commercial sources. It is also found along with cesium in the extensive deposits
of pollucite at Bernic Lake, Manitoba. Rubidium can be liquid at room temperature. It is a soft, silvery-white metallic element of the alkali group and
is the second most electropositive and alkaline element. It ignites spontaneously in air and reacts violently in water, setting fire to the liberated hydrogen.
As with other alkali metals, it forms amalgams with mercury and it alloys with gold, cesium, sodium, and potassium. It colors a flame yellowish violet.
Rubidium metal can be prepared by reducing rubidium chloride with calcium, and by a number of other methods. It must be kept under a dry mineral
oil or in a vacuum or inert atmosphere. Thirty five isotopes and isomers of rubidium are known. Naturally occurring rubidium is made of two isotopes,
85Rb and 87Rb. Rubidium-87 is present to the extent of 27.83% in natural rubidium and is a beta emitter with a half-life of 4.9 × 1010 years. Ordinary
rubidium is sufficiently radioactive to expose a photographic film in about 30 to 60 days. Rubidium forms four oxides: Rb2O, Rb2O2, Rb2O3, Rb2O4.
Because rubidium can be easily ionized, it has been considered for use in “ion engines” for space vehicles; however, cesium is somewhat more efficient
for this purpose. It is also proposed for use as a working fluid for vapor turbines and for use in a thermoelectric generator using the magnetohydro-
dynamic principle where rubidium ions are formed by heat at high temperature and passed through a magnetic field. These conduct electricity and act
like an armature of a generator thereby generating an electric current. Rubidium is used as a getter in vacuum tubes and as a photocell component. It
has been used in making special glasses. RbAg4I5 is important, as it has the highest room conductivity of any known ionic crystal. At 20°C its
conductivity is about the same as dilute sulfuric acid. This suggests use in thin film batteries and other applications. The present cost in small quantities
is about $50/g (99.8% pure).
Ruthenium — (L. Ruthenia, Russia), Ru; at. wt. 101.07(2); at. no. 44, m.p. 2334°C; b.p. 4150°C; sp. gr. 12.41 (20°C); valence 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8. Berzelius and Osann in 1827 examined the residues left after dissolving crude platinum from the Ural mountains in aqua regia. While Berzelius
found no unusual metals, Osann thought he found three new metals, one of which he named ruthenium. In 1844 Klaus, generally recognized as the
discoverer, showed that Osann’s ruthenium oxide was very impure and that it contained a new metal. Klaus obtained 6 g of ruthenium from the portion
of crude platinum that is insoluble in aqua regia. A member of the platinum group, ruthenium occurs native with other members of the group in ores
found in the Ural mountains and in North and South America. It is also found along with other platinum metals in small but commercial quantities
in pentlandite of the Sudbury, Ontario, nickel-mining region, and in pyroxinite deposits of South Africa. Natural ruthenium contains seven isotopes.
Twenty-eight other isotopes and isomers are known, all of which are radioactive. The metal is isolated commercially by a complex chemical process,
the final stage of which is the hydrogen reduction of ammonium ruthenium chloride, which yields a powder. The powder is consolidated by powder
metallurgy techniques or by argon-arc welding. Ruthenium is a hard, white metal and has four crystal modifications. It does not tarnish at room
temperatures, but oxidizes in air at about 800°C. The metal is not attacked by hot or cold acids or aqua regia, but when potassium chlorate is added
to the solution, it oxidizes explosively. It is attacked by halogens, hydroxides, etc. Ruthenium can be plated by electrodeposition or by thermal


--- PAGE 729 ---
TeamLRN
THE ELEMENTS (continued)
4-27
decomposition methods. The metal is one of the most effective hardeners for platinum and palladium, and is alloyed with these metals to make electrical
contacts for severe wear resistance. A ruthenium-molybdenum alloy is said to be superconductive at 10.6 K. The corrosion resistance of titanium is
improved a hundredfold by addition of 0.1% ruthenium. It is a versatile catalyst. Hydrogen sulfide can be split catalytically by light using an aqueous
suspension of CdS particles loaded with ruthenium dioxide. It is thought this may have application to removal of H2S from oil refining and other
industrial processes. Compounds in at least eight oxidation states have been found, but of these, the +2. +3. and +4 states are the most common.
Ruthenium tetroxide, like osmium tetroxide, is highly toxic. In addition, it may explode. Ruthenium compounds show a marked resemblance to those
of osmium. The metal is priced at about $25/g (99.95% pure).
Rutherfordium — (named for Ernest Rutherford [1871–1937], New Zealand, Canadian, and British physicist); Rf; at. wt. [261]; at. no. 104. In
1964, workers of the Joint Nuclear Research Institute at Dubna (Russia) bombarded plutonium with accelerated 113 to 115 MeV neon ions. By
measuring fission tracks in a special glass with a microscope, they detected an isotope that decays by spontaneous fission. They suggested that this
isotope, which has a half-life of 0.3 ± 0.1 s, might be 260104, produced by the following reaction:
94
242
10
22
260104
4
Pu
Ne
n
+
→
+
Element 104, the first transactinide element, is expected to have chemical properties similar to those of hafnium. It would, for example, form a relatively
volatile compound with chlorine (a tetrachloride). The Soviet scientists have performed experiments aimed at chemical identification, and have
attempted to show that the 0.3-s activity is more volatile than that of the relatively nonvolatile actinide trichlorides. This experiment does not fulfill
the test of chemically separating the new element from all others, but it provides important evidence for evaluation. New data, reportedly issued by
Soviet scientists, have reduced the half-life of the isotope they worked with from 0.3 to 0.15 s. The Dubna scientists suggest the name kurchatovium
and symbol Ku for Element 104, in honor of Igor Vasilevich Kurchatov (1903—1960), late Head of Soviet Nuclear Research. The Dubna Group also
has proposed the name dubnium for Element 104. In 1969, Ghiorso, Nurmia, Harris, K. A. Y. Eskola, and P. L. Eskola of the University of California
at Berkeley reported they had positively identified two, and possibly three, isotopes of Element 104. The group also indicated that after repeated
attempts so far they have been unable to produce isotope 260104 reported by the Dubna groups in 1964. The discoveries at Berkeley were made by
bombarding a target of 249Cf with 12C nuclei of 71 MeV, and 13C nuclei of 69 MeV. The combination of 12C with 249Cf followed by instant emission
of four neutrons produced Element 257104. This isotope has a half-life of 4 to 5 s, decaying by emitting an alpha particle into 253No, with a half-life
of 105 s. The same reaction, except with the emission of three neutrons, was thought to have produced 258104 with a half-life of about 1/100 s. Element
259104 is formed by the merging of a 13C nuclei with 249Cf, followed by emission of three neutrons. This isotope has a half-life of 3 to 4 s, and decays
by emitting an alpha particle into 255No, which has a half-life of 185 s. Thousands of atoms of 257104 and 259104 have been detected. The Berkeley
group believe their identification of 258104 was correct. Eleven isotopes of Element 104 have now been identified. The Berkeley group proposed for
the new element the name rutherfordium (symbol Rf), in honor of Ernest Rutherford. This name was formally adapted by IUPAC in August 1997.
Samarium — (Samarskite a mineral), Sm; at. wt. 150.36(3); at. no. 62; m.p. 1074°C; b.p. 1794°C; sp. gr (α) 7.520 (25°C); valence 2 or 3.
Discovered spectroscopically by its sharp absorption lines in 1879 by Lecoq de Boisbaudran in the mineral samarskite, named in honor of a Russian
mine official, Col. Samarski. Samarium is found along with other members of the rare-earth elements in many minerals, including monazite and
bastnasite, which are commercial sources. The largest producer of rare earth minerals is now China, followed by the U.S., India, and Russia. It occurs
in monazite to the extent of 2.8%. While misch metal containing about 1% of samarium metal, has long been used, samarium has not been isolated
in relatively pure form until recent years. Ion-exchange and solvent extraction techniques have recently simplified separation of the rare earths from
one another; more recently, electrochemical deposition, using an electrolytic solution of lithium citrate and a mercury electrode, is said to be a simple,
fast, and highly specific way to separate the rare earths. Samarium metal can be produced by reducing the oxide with barium or lanthanum. Samarium
has a bright silver luster and is reasonably stable in air. Three crystal modifications of the metal exist, with transformations at 734 and 922°C. The metal
ignites in air at about 150°C. Thirty-three isotopes and isomers of samarium are now recognized. Natural samarium is a mixture of seven isotopes,
three of which are unstable but have long half-lives. Samarium, along with other rare earths, is used for carbon-arc lighting for the motion picture
industry. The sulfide has excellent high-temperature stability and good thermoelectric efficiencies up to 1100°C. SmCo5 has been used in making a
new permanent magnet material with the highest resistance to demagnetization of any known material. It is said to have an intrinsic coercive force
as high as 2200 kA/m. Samarium oxide has been used in optical glass to absorb the infrared. Samarium is used to dope calcium fluoride crystals for
use in optical masers or lasers. Compounds of the metal act as sensitizers for phosphors excited in the infrared; the oxide exhibits catalytic properties
in the dehydration and dehydrogenation of ethyl alcohol. It is used in infrared absorbing glass and as a neutron absorber in nuclear reactors. The metal
is priced at about $3.50/g (99.9%). Little is known of the toxicity of samarium; therefore, it should be handled carefully.
Scandium — (L. Scandia, Scandinavia), Sc; at. wt. 44.955910(8); at. no. 21; m.p. 1541°C; b.p. 2836°C; sp. gr. 2.989 (25°C); valence 3. On the
basis of the Periodic System, Mendeleev predicted the existence of ekaboron, which would have an atomic weight between 40 of calcium and 48 of
titanium. The element was discovered by Nilson in 1878 in the minerals euxenite and gadolinite, which had not yet been found anywhere except in
Scandinavia. By processing 10 kg of euxenite and other residues of rare-earth minerals, Nilson was able to prepare about 2 g of scandium oxide of
high purity. Cleve later pointed out that Nilson’s scandium was identical with Mendeleev’s ekaboron. Scandium is apparently a much more abundant
element in the sun and certain stars than here on earth. It is about the 23rd most abundant element in the sun, compared to the 50th most abundant on
earth. It is widely distributed on earth, occurring in very minute quantities in over 800 mineral species. The blue color of beryl (aquamarine variety)
is said to be due to scandium. It occurs as a principal component in the rare mineral thortveitite, found in Scandinavia and Malagasy. It is also found
in the residues remaining after the extraction of tungsten from Zinnwald wolframite, and in wiikite and bazzite. Most scandium is presently being
recovered from thortveitite or is extracted as a by-product from uranium mill tailings. Metallic scandium was first prepared in 1937 by Fischer, Brunger,
and Grieneisen, who electrolyzed a eutectic melt of potassium, lithium, and scandium chlorides at 700 to 800°C. Tungsten wire and a pool of molten
zinc served as the electrodes in a graphite crucible. Pure scandium is now produced by reducing scandium fluoride with calcium metal. The production
of the first pound of 99% pure scandium metal was announced in 1960. Scandium is a silver-white metal which develops a slightly yellowish or pinkish
cast upon exposure to air. It is relatively soft, and resembles yttrium and the rare-earth metals more than it resembles aluminum or titanium. It is a very
light metal and has a much higher melting point than aluminum, making it of interest to designers of spacecraft. Scandium is not attacked by a 1:1


--- PAGE 730 ---
THE ELEMENTS (continued)
4-28
mixture of conc. HNO3 and 48% HF. Scandium reacts rapidly with many acids. Twenty-three isotopes and isomers of scandium are recognized. The
metal is expensive, costing about $200/g with a purity of about 99.9%. About 20 kg of scandium (as Sc2O3) are now being used yearly in the U.S. to
produce high-intensity lights, and the radioactive isotope 46Sc is used as a tracing agent in refinery crackers for crude oil, etc. Scandium iodide added
to mercury vapor lamps produces a highly efficient light source resembling sunlight, which is important for indoor or night-time color TV. Little is
yet known about the toxicity of scandium; therefore, it should be handled with care.
Seaborgium — (named for Glenn T. Seaborg [1912–1999], American chemist and nuclear physicist). Sg; at. wt. [263]; at no. 106. The discovery
of Seaborgium, Element 106, took place in 1974 almost simultaneously at the Lawrence-Berkeley Laboratory and at the Joint Institute for Nuclear
Research at Dubna, Russia. The Berkeley Group, under direction of Ghiorso, used the Super-Heavy Ion Linear Accelerator (Super HILAC) as a source
of heavy 18O ions to bombard a 259-µg target of 249Cf. This resulted in the production and positive identification of 263106, which decayed with a half-
life of 0.9 ± 0.2 s by the emission of alpha particles as follows:
263
259
255
106
104
α
α
α
→

→

→

No
.
The Dubna Team, directed by Flerov and Organessian, produced heavy ions of 54Cr with their 310-cm heavy-ion cyclotron to bombard 207Pb and 208Pb
and found a product that decayed with a half-life of 7 ms. They assigned 259106 to this isotope. It is now thought seven isotopes of Seaborgium have
been identified. Two of the isotopes are believed to have half-lives of about 30 s. Seaborgium most likely would have properties resembling tungsten.
The IUPAC adopted the name Seaborgium in August 1997. Normally the naming of an element is not given until after the death of the person for which
the element is named; however, in this case, it was named while Dr. Seaborg was still alive.
Selenium — (Gr. Selene, moon), Se; at. wt. 78.96(3); at. no. 34; m.p. (gray) 221°C; b.p. (gray) 685°C; sp. gr. (gray) 4.79, (vitreous) 4.28; valence
–2, +4, or +6. Discovered by Berzelius in 1817, who found it associated with tellurium, named for the earth. Selenium is found in a few rare minerals,
such as crooksite and clausthalite. In years past it has been obtained from flue dusts remaining from processing copper sulfide ores, but the anode muds
from electrolytic copper refineries now provide the source of most of the world’s selenium. Selenium is recovered by roasting the muds with soda or
sulfuric acid, or by smelting them with soda and niter. Selenium exists in several allotropic forms. Three are generally recognized, but as many as six
have been claimed. Selenium can be prepared with either an amorphous or crystalline structure. The color of amorphous selenium is either red, in
powder form, or black, in vitreous form. Crystalline monoclinic selenium is a deep red; crystalline hexagonal selenium, the most stable variety, is a
metallic gray. Natural selenium contains six stable isotopes. Twenty-nine other isotopes and isomers have been characterized. The element is a member
of the sulfur family and resembles sulfur both in its various forms and in its compounds. Selenium exhibits both photovoltaic action, where light is
converted directly into electricity, and photoconductive action, where the electrical resistance decreases with increased illumination. These properties
make selenium useful in the production of photocells and exposure meters for photographic use, as well as solar cells. Selenium is also able to convert
a.c. electricity to d.c., and is extensively used in rectifiers. Below its melting point selenium is a p-type semiconductor and is finding many uses in
electronic and solid-state applications. It is used in Xerography for reproducing and copying documents, letters, etc., but recently its use in this
application has been decreasing in favor of certain organic compounds. It is used by the glass industry to decolorize glass and to make ruby-colored
glasses and enamels. It is also used as a photographic toner, and as an additive to stainless steel. Elemental selenium has been said to be practically
nontoxic and is considered to be an essential trace element; however, hydrogen selenide and  other selenium compounds are extremely toxic, and
resemble arsenic in their physiological reactions. Hydrogen selenide in a concentration of 1.5 ppm is intolerable to man. Selenium occurs in some soils
in amounts sufficient to produce serious effects on animals feeding on plants, such as locoweed, grown in such soils. Selenium (99.5%) is priced at
about $250/kg. It is also available in high-purity form at a cost of about $350/kg (99.999%).
Silicon — (L. silex, silicis, flint), Si; at. wt. 28.0855(3); at. no. 14; m.p. 1414°C; b.p. 3265°C; sp. gr. 2.33 (25°C); valence 4. Davy in 1800 thought
silica to be a compound and not an element; later in 1811, Gay Lussac and Thenard probably prepared impure amorphous silicon by heating potassium
with silicon tetrafluoride. Berzelius, generally credited with the discovery, in 1824 succeeded in preparing amorphous silicon by the same general
method as used earlier, but he purified the product by removing the fluosilicates by repeated washings. Deville in 1854 first prepared crystalline silicon,
the second allotropic form of the element. Silicon is present in the sun and stars and is a principal component of a class of meteorites known as
“aerolites”. It is also a component of tektites, a natural glass of uncertain origin. Natural silicon contains three isotopes. Twenty-four other radioactive
isotopes are recognized. Silicon makes up 25.7% of the earth’s crust, by weight, and is the second most abundant element, being exceeded only by
oxygen. Silicon is not found free in nature, but occurs chiefly as the oxide and as silicates. Sand, quartz, rock crystal, amethyst, agate, flint, jasper,
and opal are some of the forms in which the oxide appears. Granite, hornblende, asbestos, feldspar, clay mica, etc. are but a few of the numerous silicate
minerals. Silicon is prepared commercially by heating silica and carbon in an electric furnace, using carbon electrodes. Several other methods can be
used for preparing the element. Amorphous silicon can be prepared as a brown powder, which can be easily melted or vaporized. Crystalline silicon
has a metallic luster and grayish color. The Czochralski process is commonly used to produce single crystals of silicon used for solid-state or
semiconductor devices. Hyperpure silicon can be prepared by the thermal decomposition of ultra-pure trichlorosilane in a hydrogen atmosphere, and
by a vacuum float zone process. This product can be doped with boron, gallium, phosphorus, or arsenic to produce silicon for use in transistors, solar
cells, rectifiers, and other solid-state devices which are used extensively in the electronics and space-age industries. Hydrogenated amorphous silicon
has shown promise in producing economical cells for converting solar energy into electricity. Silicon is a relatively inert element, but it is attacked
by halogens and dilute alkali. Most acids except hydrofluoric, do not affect it. Silicones are important products of silicon. They may be prepared by
hydrolyzing a silicon organic chloride, such as dimethyl silicon chloride. Hydrolysis and condensation of various substituted chlorosilanes can be used
to produce a very great number of polymeric products, or silicones, ranging from liquids to hard, glasslike solids with many useful properties. Elemental
silicon transmits more than 95% of all wavelengths of infrared, from 1.3 to 6.7 µm. Silicon is one of man’s most useful elements. In the form of sand
and clay it is used to make concrete and brick; it is a useful refractory material for high-temperature work, and in the form of silicates it is used in making
enamels, pottery, etc. Silica, as sand, is a principal ingredient of glass, one of the most inexpensive of materials with excellent mechanical, optical,
thermal, and electrical properties. Glass can be made in a very great variety of shapes, and is used as containers, window glass, insulators, and thousands
of other uses. Silicon tetrachloride can be used to iridize glass. Silicon is important in plant and animal life. Diatoms in both fresh and salt water extract
silica from the water to build up their cell walls. Silica is present in ashes of plants and in the human skeleton. Silicon is an important ingredient in


--- PAGE 732 ---
THE ELEMENTS (continued)
4-30
Strontium is found chiefly as celestite (SrSO4) and strontianite (SrCO3). Celestite is found in Mexico, Turkey, Iran, Spain, Algeria, and in the U.K.
The U.S. has no active celestite mines. The metal can be prepared by electrolysis of the fused chloride mixed with potassium chloride, or is made by
reducing strontium oxide with aluminum in a vacuum at a temperature at which strontium distills off. Three allotropic forms of the metal exist, with
transition points at 235 and 540°C. Strontium is softer than calcium and decomposes water more vigorously. It does not absorb nitrogen below 380°C.
It should be kept under mineral oil to prevent oxidation. Freshly cut strontium has a silvery appearance, but rapidly turns a yellowish color with the
formation of the oxide. The finely divided metal ignites spontaneously in air. Volatile strontium salts impart a beautiful crimson color to flames, and
these salts are used in pyrotechnics and in the production of flares. Natural strontium is a mixture of four stable isotopes. Thirty-two other unstable
isotopes and isomers are known to exist. Of greatest importance is 90Sr with a half-life of 29 years. It is a product of nuclear fallout and presents a health
problem. This isotope is one of the best long-lived high-energy beta emitters known, and is used in SNAP (Systems for Nuclear Auxiliary Power)
devices. These devices hold promise for use in space vehicles, remote weather stations, navigational buoys, etc., where a lightweight, long-lived,
nuclear-electric power source is needed. The major use for strontium at present is in producing glass for color television picture tubes. All color TV
and cathode ray tubes sold in the U.S. are required by law to contain strontium in the face plate glass to block  X-ray emission. Strontium also improves
the brilliance of the glass and the quality of the picture. It has also found use in producing ferrite magnets and in refining zinc. Strontium titanate is
an interesting optical material as it has an extremely high refractive index and an optical dispersion greater than that of diamond. It has been used as
a gemstone, but it is very soft. It does not occur naturally. Strontium metal (99% pure) costs about $220/kg.
Sulfur — (Sanskrit, sulvere; L. sulphurium), S; at. wt. 32.066(6); at. no. 16; m.p. 115.21°C; b.p. 444.60°C; tc 1041°C; sp. gr. (rhombic) 2.07,
(monoclinic) 1.957 (20°C); valence 2, 4, or 6. Known to the ancients; referred to in Genesis as brimstone. Sulfur is found in meteorites. A dark area
near the crater Aristarchus on the moon has been studied by R. W. Wood with ultraviolet light. This study suggests strongly that it is a sulfur deposit.
Sulfur occurs native in the vicinity of volcanoes and hot springs. It is widely distributed in nature as iron pyrites, galena, sphalerite, cinnabar, stibnite,
gypsum, Epsom salts, celestite, barite,etc. Sulfur is commercially recovered from wells sunk into the salt domes along the Gulf Coast of the U.S. It
is obtained from these wells by the Frasch process, which forces heated water into the wells to melt the sulfur, which is then brought to the surface.
Sulfur also occurs in natural gas and petroleum crudes and must be removed from these products. Formerly this was done chemically, which wasted
the sulfur. New processes now permit recovery, and these sources promise to be very important. Large amounts of sulfur are being recovered from
Alberta gas fields. Sulfur is a pale yellow, odorless, brittle solid, which is insoluble in water but soluble in carbon disulfide. In every state, whether
gas, liquid or solid, elemental sulfur occurs in more than one allotropic form or modification; these present a confusing multitude of forms whose
relations are not yet fully understood. Amorphous or “plastic” sulfur is obtained by fast cooling of the crystalline form. X-ray studies indicate that
amorphous sulfur may have a helical structure with eight atoms per spiral. Crystalline sulfur seems to be made of rings, each containing eight sulfur
atoms, which fit together to give a normal X-ray pattern. Twenty-one isotopes of sulfur are now recognized. Four occur in natural sulfur, none of which
is radioactive. A finely divided form of sulfur, known as flowers of sulfur, is obtained by sublimation. Sulfur readily forms sulfides with many elements.
Sulfur is a component of black gunpowder, and is used in the vulcanization of natural rubber and a fungicide. It is also used extensively is making
phosphatic fertilizers. A tremendous tonnage is used to produce sulfuric acid, the most important manufactured chemical. It is used in making sulfite
paper and other papers, as a fumigant, and in the bleaching of dried fruits. The element is a good electrical insulator. Organic compounds containing
sulfur are very important. Calcium sulfate, ammonium sulfate, carbon disulfide, sulfur dioxide, and hydrogen sulfide are but a few of the many other
important compounds of sulfur. Sulfur is essential to life. It is a minor constituent of fats, body fluids, and skeletal minerals. Carbon disulfide, hydrogen
sulfide, and sulfur dioxide should be handled carefully. Hydrogen sulfide in small concentrations can be metabolized, but in higher concentrations it
quickly can cause death by respiratory paralysis. It is insidious in that it quickly deadens the sense of smell. Sulfur dioxide is a dangerous component
in atmospheric air pollution. In 1975, University of Pennsylvania scientists reported synthesis of polymeric sulfur nitride, which has the properties
of a metal, although it contains no metal atoms. The material has unusual optical and electrical properties. Sulfur (99.999%) costs about $575/kg.
Tantalum — (Gr. Tantalos, mythological character, father of Niobe), Ta; at. wt. 180.9479(1); at. no. 73; m.p. 3017°C; b.p. 5458°C; sp. gr. 16.654;
valence 2?, 3, 4?, or 5. Discovered in 1802 by Ekeberg, but many chemists thought niobium and tantalum were identical elements until Rose, in 1844,
and Marignac, in1866, showed that niobic and tantalic acids were two different acids. The early investigators only isolated the impure metal. The first
relatively pure ductile tantalum was produced by von Bolton in 1903. Tantalum occurs principally in the mineral columbite-tantalite (Fe, Mn)(Nb,
Ta)2O6. Tantalum ores are found in Australia, Brazil, Rwanda, Zimbabwe, Congo-Kinshasa, Nigeria, and Canada. Separation of tantalum from
niobium requires several complicated steps. Several methods are used to commercially produce the element, including electrolysis of molten potassium
fluorotantalate, reduction of potassium fluorotantalate with sodium, or reacting tantalum carbide with tantalum oxide. Thirty four isotopes and isomers
of tantalum are known to exist. Natural tantalum contains two isotopes, one of which is radioactive with a very long half-life. Tantalum is a gray, heavy,
and very hard metal. When pure, it is ductile and can be drawn into fine wire, which is used as a filament for evaporating metals such as aluminum.
Tantalum is almost completely immune to chemical attack at temperatures below 150°C, and is attacked only by hydrofluoric acid, acidic solutions
containing the fluoride ion, and free sulfur trioxide. Alkalis attack it only slowly. At high temperatures, tantalum becomes much more reactive. The
element has a melting point exceeded only by tungsten and rhenium. Tantalum is used to make a variety of alloys with desirable properties such as
high melting point, high strength, good ductility, etc. Scientists at Los Alamos have produced a tantalum carbide graphite composite material, which
is said to be one of the hardest materials ever made. The compound has a melting point of 3738°C. Tantalum has good “gettering” ability at high
temperatures, and tantalum oxide films are stable and have good rectifying and dielectric properties. Tantalum is used to make electrolytic capacitors
and vacuum furnace parts, which account for about 60% of its use. The metal is also widely used to fabricate chemical process equipment, nuclear
reactors, and aircraft and missile parts. Tantalum is completely immune to body liquids and is a nonirritating metal. It has, therefore, found wide use
in making surgical appliances. Tantalum oxide is used to make special glass with high index of refraction for camera lenses. The metal has many other
uses. The price of (99.9%) tantalum is about $2/g.
Technetium — (Gr. technetos, artificial), Tc; at. wt. (98); at. no. 43; m.p. 2157°C; b.p. 4265°C; sp. gr. 11.50 (calc.); valence 0, +2, +4, +5, +6,
and +7. Element 43 was predicted on the basis of the periodic table, and was erroneously reported as having been discovered in 1925, at which time
it was named masurium. The element was actually discovered by Perrier and Segre in Italy in 1937. It was found in a sample of molybdenum, which
was bombarded by deuterons in the Berkeley cyclotron, and which E. Lawrence sent to these investigators. Technetium was the first element to be
produced artificially. Since its discovery, searches for the element in terrestrial materials have been made without success. If it does exist, the
concentration must be very small. Technetium has been found in the spectrum of S-, M-, and N-type stars, and its presence in stellar matter is leading


--- PAGE 734 ---
THE ELEMENTS (continued)
4-32
years in the future. Work has been done in developing thorium cycle converter-reactor systems. Several prototypes, including the HTGR (high-
temperature gas-cooled reactor) and MSRE (molten salt converter reactor experiment), have operated. While the HTGR reactors are efficient, they
are not expected to become important commercially for many years because of certain operating difficulties. Thorium is recovered commercially from
the mineral monazite, which contains from 3 to 9% ThO2 along with rare-earth minerals. Much of the internal heat the earth produces has been attributed
to thorium and uranium. Several methods are available for producing thorium metal: it can be obtained by reducing thorium oxide with calcium, by
electrolysis of anhydrous thorium chloride in a fused mixture of sodium and potassium chlorides, by calcium reduction of thorium tetrachloride mixed
with anhydrous zinc chloride, and by reduction of thorium tetrachloride with an alkali metal. Thorium was originally assigned a position in Group IV
of the periodic table. Because of its atomic weight, valence, etc., it is now considered to be the second member of the actinide series of elements. When
pure, thorium is a silvery-white metal which is air-stable and retains its luster for several months. When contaminated with the oxide, thorium slowly
tarnishes in air, becoming gray and finally black. The physical properties of thorium are greatly influenced by the degree of contamination with the
oxide. The purest specimens often contain several tenths of a percent of the oxide. High-purity thorium has been made. Pure thorium is soft, very ductile,
and can be cold-rolled, swaged, and drawn. Thorium is dimorphic, changing at 1400°C from a cubic to a body-centered cubic structure. Thorium oxide
has a melting point of 3300°C, which is the highest of all oxides. Only a few elements, such as tungsten, and a few compounds, such as tantalum carbide,
have higher melting points. Thorium is slowly attacked by water, but does not dissolve readily in most common acids, except hydrochloric. Powdered
thorium metal is often pyrophoric and should be carefully handled. When heated in air, thorium turnings ignite and burn brilliantly with a white light.
The principal use of thorium has been in the preparation of the Welsbach mantle, used for portable gas lights. These mantles, consisting of thorium
oxide with about 1% cerium oxide and other ingredients, glow with a dazzling light when heated in a gas flame. Thorium is an important alloying
element in magnesium, imparting high strength and creep resistance at elevated temperatures. Because thorium has a low work-function and high
electron emission, it is used to coat tungsten wire used in electronic equipment. The oxide is also used to control the grain size of tungsten used for
electric lamps; it is also used for high-temperature laboratory crucibles. Glasses containing thorium oxide have a high refractive index and low
dispersion. Consequently, they find application in high quality lenses for cameras and scientific instruments. Thorium oxide has also found use as a
catalyst in the conversion of ammonia to nitric acid, in petroleum cracking, and in producing sulfuric acid. Thorium has not found many uses due to
its radioactive nature and its handling and disposal problems. Thirty  isotopes of thorium are known with atomic masses ranging from 210 to 237. All
are unstable. 232Th occurs naturally and has a half-life of 1.4 × 1010 years. It is an alpha emitter. 232Th goes through six alpha and four beta decay steps
before becoming the stable isotope 208Pb. 232Th is sufficiently radioactive to expose a photographic plate in a few hours. Thorium disintegrates with
the production of “thoron” (220Rn), which is an alpha emitter and presents a radiation hazard. Good ventilation of areas where thorium is stored or
handled is therefore essential. Thorium metal (99.8%) costs about $25/g.
Thulium — (Thule, the earliest name for Scandinavia), Tm; at. wt. 168.93421(3); at. no. 69; m.p. 1545°C; b.p. 1950°C; sp. gr. 9.321 (25°C); valence
3. Discovered in 1879 by Cleve. Thulium occurs in small quantities along with other rare earths in a number of minerals. It is obtained commercially
from monazite, which contains about 0.007% of the element. Thulium is the least abundant of the rare earth elements, but with new sources recently
discovered, it is now considered to be about as rare as silver, gold, or cadmium. Ion-exchange and solvent extraction techniques have recently permitted
much easier separation of the rare earths, with much lower costs. Only a few years ago, thulium metal was not obtainable at any cost; in 1996 the oxide
cost $20/g. Thulium metal powder now costs $70/g (99.9%). Thulium can be isolated by reduction of the oxide with lanthanum metal or by calcium
reduction of the anhydrous fluoride. The pure metal has a bright, silvery luster. It is reasonably stable in air, but the metal should be protected from
moisture in a closed container. The element is silver-gray, soft, malleable, and ductile, and can be cut with a knife. Forty-one isotopes and isomers
are known, with atomic masses ranging from 146 to 176. Natural thulium, which is 100% 169Tm, is stable. Because of the relatively high price of the
metal, thulium has not yet found many practical applications. 169Tm bombarded in a nuclear reactor can be used as a radiation source in portable X-
ray equipment. 171Tm is potentially useful as an energy source. Natural thulium also has possible use in ferrites (ceramic magnetic materials) used
in microwave equipment. As with other lanthanides, thulium has a low-to-moderate acute toxic rating. It should be handled with care.
Tin — (anglo-Saxon, tin), Sn (L. stannum); at. wt. 118.710(7); at. no. 50; m.p. 231.93°C; b.p. 2602°C; sp. gr. (gray) 5.75, (white) 7.31; valence
2, 4. Known to the ancients. Tin is found chiefly in cassiterite (SnO2). Most of the world’s supply comes from China, Indonesia, Peru, Brazil, and
Bolivia. The U.S. produces almost none, although occurrences have been found in Alaska and Colorado. Tin is obtained by reducing the ore with coal
in a reverberatory furnace. Ordinary tin is composed of ten stable isotopes; thirty-six unstable isotopes and isomers are also known. Ordinary tin is
a silver-white metal, is malleable, somewhat ductile, and has a highly crystalline structure. Due to the breaking of these crystals, a “tin cry” is heard
when a bar is bent. The element has two allotropic forms at normal pressure. On warming, gray, or α tin, with a cubic structure, changes at 13.2°C
into white, or β tin, the ordinary form of the metal. White tin has a tetragonal structure. When tin is cooled below 13.2°C, it changes slowly from white
to gray. This change is affected by impurities such as aluminum and zinc, and can be prevented by small additions of antimony or bismuth. This change
from the α to β form is called the tin pest. Tin-lead alloys are used to make organ pipes. There are few if any uses for gray tin. Tin takes a high polish
and is used to coat other metals to prevent corrosion or other chemical action. Such tin plate over steel is used in the so-called tin can for preserving
food. Alloys of tin are very important. Soft solder, type metal, fusible metal, pewter, bronze, bell metal, Babbitt metal, White metal, die casting alloy,
and phosphor bronze are some of the important alloys using tin. Tin resists distilled sea and soft tap water, but is attacked by strong acids, alkalis, and
acid salts. Oxygen in solution accelerates the attack. When heated in air, tin forms SnO2, which is feebly acid, forming stannate salts with basic oxides.
The most important salt is the chloride (SnCl2 · H2O), which is used as a reducing agent and as a mordant in calico printing. Tin salts sprayed onto
glass are used to produce electrically conductive coatings. These have been used for panel lighting and for frost-free windshields. Most window glass
is now made by floating molten glass on molten tin (float glass) to produce a flat surface (Pilkington process). Of recent interest is a crystalline tin-
niobium alloy that is superconductive at very low temperatures. This promises to be important in the construction of superconductive magnets that
generate enormous field strengths but use practically no power. Such magnets, made of tin-niobium wire, weigh but a few pounds and produce magnetic
fields that, when started with a small battery, are comparable to that of a 100 ton electromagnet operated continuously with a large power supply. The
small amount of tin found in canned foods is quite harmless. The agreed limit of tin content in U.S. foods is 300 mg/kg. The trialkyl and triaryl tin
compounds are used as biocides and must be handled carefully. Over the past 25 years the price of commercial tin has varied from 50¢/lb ($1.10/kg)
to its present price of about $6/kg in January 2002. Tin (99.99% pure) costs about $260/kg.
Titanium — (L. Titans, the first sons of the Earth, myth.), Ti; at. wt. 47.867(1); at. no. 22; m.p. 1668°C; b.p. 3287°C; sp. gr. 4.54; valence 2, 3,
or 4. Discovered by Gregor in 1791; named by Klaproth in 1795. Impure titanium was prepared by Nilson and Pettersson in 1887; however, the pure


--- PAGE 735 ---
TeamLRN
THE ELEMENTS (continued)
4-33
metal (99.9%) was not made until 1910 by Hunter by heating TiCl4 with sodium in a steel bomb. Titanium is present in meteorites and in the sun. Rocks
obtained during the Apollo 17 lunar mission showed presence of 12.1% TiO2. Analyses of rocks obtained during earlier Apollo missions show lower
percentages. Titanium oxide bands are prominent in the spectra of M-type stars. The element is the ninth most abundant in the crust of the earth.
Titanium is almost always present in igneous rocks and in the sediments derived from them. It occurs in the minerals rutile, ilmenite, and sphene, and
is present in titanates and in many iron ores. Deposits of ilmenite and rutile are found in Florida, California, Tennessee, and New York. Australia,
Norway, Malaysia, India, and China are also large suppliers of titanium minerals. Titanium is present in the ash of coal, in plants, and in the human
body. The metal was a laboratory curiosity until Kroll, in 1946, showed that titanium could be produced commercially by reducing titanium
tetrachloride with magnesium. This method is largely used for producing the metal today. The metal can be purified by decomposing the iodide.
Titanium, when pure, is a lustrous, white metal. It has a low density, good strength, is easily fabricated, and has excellent corrosion resistance. It is
ductile only when it is free of oxygen. The metal burns in air and is the only element that burns in nitrogen. Titanium is resistant to dilute sulfuric and
hydrochloric acid, most organic acids, moist chlorine gas, and chloride solutions. Natural titanium consists of five isotopes with atomic masses from
46 to 50. All are stable. Eighteen other unstable isotopes are known. The metal is dimorphic. The hexagonal α form changes to the cubic β form very
slowly at about 880°C. The metal combines with oxygen at red heat, and with chlorine at 550°C. Titanium is important as an alloying agent with
aluminum, molybdenum, manganese, iron, and other metals. Alloys of titanium are principally used for aircraft and missiles where lightweight strength
and ability to withstand extremes of temperature are important. Titanium is as strong as steel, but 45% lighter. It is 60% heavier than aluminum, but
twice as strong. Titanium has potential use in desalination plants for converting sea water into fresh water. The metal has excellent resistance to sea
water and is used for propeller shafts, rigging, and other parts of ships exposed to salt water. A titanium anode coated with platinum has been used
to provide cathodic protection from corrosion by salt water. Titanium metal is considered to be physiologically inert; however, titanium powder may
be a carcinogenic hazard. When pure, titanium dioxide is relatively clear and has an extremely high index of refraction with an optical dispersion higher
than diamond. It is produced artificially for use as a gemstone, but it is relatively soft. Star sapphires and rubies exhibit their asterism as a result of
the presence of TiO2. Titanium dioxide is extensively used for both house paint and artist’s paint, as it is permanent and has good covering power.
Titanium oxide pigment accounts for the largest use of the element. Titanium paint is an excellent reflector of infrared, and is extensively used in solar
observatories where heat causes poor seeing conditions. Titanium tetrachloride is used to iridize glass. This compound fumes strongly in air and has
been used to produce smoke screens. The price of titanium metal (99.9%) is about $1100/kg.
Tungsten — (Swedish, tung sten, heavy stone); also known as wolfram (from wolframite, said to be named from wolf rahm or spumi lupi, because
the ore interfered with the smelting of tin and was supposed to devour the tin), W; at. wt. 183.84(1); at. no. 74; m.p. 3422°C; b.p. 5555°C; sp. gr. 19.3
(20°C); valence 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6. In 1779 Peter Woulfe examined the mineral now known as wolframite and concluded it must contain a new substance.
Scheele, in 1781, found that a new acid could be made from tung sten (a name first applied about 1758 to a mineral now known as scheelite). Scheele
and Berman suggested the possibility of obtaining a new metal by reducing this acid. The de Elhuyar brothers found an acid in wolframite in 1783
that was identical to the acid of tungsten(tungstic acid) of Scheele, and in that year they succeeded in obtaining the element by reduction of this acid
with charcoal. Tungsten occurs in wolframite, (Fe, Mn)WO4; scheelite, CaWO4; huebnerite, MnWO4; and ferberite, FeWO4. Important deposits of
tungsten occur in California, Colorado, Bolivia, Russia, and Portugal. China is reported to have about 75% of the world’s tungsten resources. Natural
tungsten contains five stable isotopes. Thirty two other unstable isotopes and isomers are recognized. The metal is obtained commercially by reducing
tungsten oxide with hydrogen or carbon. Pure tungsten is a steel-gray to tin-white metal. Very pure tungsten can be cut with a hacksaw, and can be
forged, spun, drawn, and extruded. The impure metal is brittle and can be worked only with difficulty. Tungsten has the highest melting point of all
metals, and at temperatures over 1650°C has the highest tensile strength. The metal oxidizes in air and must be protected at elevated temperatures.
It has excellent corrosion resistance and is attacked only slightly by most mineral acids. The thermal expansion is about the same as borosilicate glass,
which makes the metal useful for glass-to-metal seals. Tungsten and its alloys are used extensively for filaments for electric lamps, electron and
television tubes, and for metal evaporation work; for electrical contact points for automobile distributors; X-ray targets; windings and heating elements
for electrical furnaces; and for numerous spacecraft and high-temperature applications. High-speed tool steels, Hastelloy®, Stellite®, and many other
alloys contain tungsten. Tungsten carbide is of great importance to the metal-working, mining, and petroleum industries.Calcium and magnesium
tungstates are widely used in fluorescent lighting; other salts of tungsten are used in the chemical and tanning industries. Tungsten disulfide is a dry,
high-temperature lubricant, stable to 500°C. Tungsten bronzes and other tungsten compounds are used in paints. Zirconium tungstate has found recent
applications (see under Zirconium). Tungsten powder (99.999%) costs about $2900/kg.
Uranium — (Planet Uranus), U; at. wt. 238.0289(1); at. no. 92; m.p. 1135°C; b.p. 4131°C; sp. gr. ~18.95; valence 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6. Yellow-colored
glass, containing more than 1% uranium oxide and dating back to 79 A.D., has been found near Naples, Italy. Klaproth recognized an unknown element
in pitchblende and attempted to isolate the metal in 1789. The metal apparently was first isolated in 1841 by Peligot, who reduced the anhydrous chloride
with potassium. Uranium is not as rare as it was once thought. It is now considered to be more plentiful than mercury, antimony, silver, or cadmium,
and is about as abundant as molybdenum or arsenic. It occurs in numerous minerals such as pitchblende, uraninite, carnotite, autunite, uranophane,
davidite, and tobernite. It is also found in phosphate rock, lignite, monazite sands, and can be recovered commercially from these sources. Large
deposits of uranium ore occur in Utah, Colorado, New Mexico, Canada, and elsewhere. Uranium can be made by reducing uranium halides with alkali
or alkaline earth metals or by reducing uranium oxides by calcium, aluminum, or carbon at high temperatures. The metal can also be produced by
electrolysis of KUF5 or UF4, dissolved in a molten mixture of CaCl2 and NaCl. High-purity uranium can be prepared by the thermal decomposition
of uranium halides on a hot filament. Uranium exhibits three crystallographic modifications as follows:
Uranium is a heavy, silvery-white metal which is pyrophoric when finely divided. It is a little softer than steel, and is attacked by cold water in a finely
divided state. It is malleable, ductile, and slightly paramagnetic. In air, the metal becomes coated with a layer of oxide. Acids dissolve the metal, but
it is unaffected by alkalis. Uranium has twenty three isotopes, one of which is an isomer and all of which are radioactive. Naturally occurring uranium
contains 99.2745% by weight 238U, 0.720% 235U, and 0.0055% 234U. Studies show that the percentage weight of 235U in natural uranium varies by
as much as 0.1%, depending on the source. The U.S.D.O.E. has adopted the value of 0.711 as being their “official” percentage of 235U in natural uranium.
Natural uranium is sufficiently radioactive to expose a photographic plate in an hour or so. Much of the internal heat of the earth is thought to be
α
β
γ
688
776
°
°

→


→

C
C


--- PAGE 737 ---
TeamLRN
THE ELEMENTS (continued)
4-35
been mounting in the past few years that xenon, as well as other members of the zero valence elements, do form compounds. Among the “compounds”
of xenon now reported are xenon hydrate, sodium perxenate, xenon deuterate, difluoride, tetrafluoride, hexafluoride, and XePtF6 and XeRhF6. Xenon
trioxide, which is highly explosive, has been prepared. More than 80 xenon compounds have been made with xenon chemically bonded to fluorine
and oxygen. Some xenon compounds are colored. Metallic xenon has been produced, using several hundred kilobars of pressure. Xenon in a vacuum
tube produces a beautiful blue glow when excited by an electrical discharge. The gas is used in making electron tubes, stroboscopic lamps, bactericidal
lamps, and lamps used to excite ruby lasers for generating coherent light. Xenon is used in the atomic energy field in bubble chambers, probes, and
other applications where its high molecular weight is of value. The perxenates are used in analytical chemistry as oxidizing agents. 133Xe and 135Xe
are produced by neutron irradiation in air cooled nuclear reactors. 133Xe has useful applications as a radioisotope. The element is available in sealed
glass containers for about $20/l of gas at standard pressure. Xenon is not toxic, but its compounds are highly toxic because of their strong oxidizing
characteristics.
Ytterbium — (Ytterby, village in Sweden), Yb; at. wt. 173.04(3); at. no. 70; m.p. 819°C; b.p. 1196°C; sp. gr (α) 6.903 (β) 6.966; valence 2, 3.
Marignac in 1878 discovered a new component, which he called ytterbia, in the earth then known as erbia. In 1907, Urbain separated ytterbia into
two components, which he called neoytterbia and lutecia. The elements in these earths are now known as ytterbium and lutetium, respectively. These
elements are identical with aldebaranium and cassiopeium, discovered independently and at about the same time by von Welsbach. Ytterbium occurs
along with other rare earths in a number of rare minerals. It is commercially recovered principally from monazite sand, which contains about 0.03%.
Ion-exchange and solvent extraction techniques developed in recent years have greatly simplified the separation of the rare earths from one another.
The element was first prepared by Klemm and Bonner in 1937 by reducing ytterbium trichloride with potassium. Their metal was mixed, however,
with KCl. Daane, Dennison, and Spedding prepared a much purer form in 1953 from which the chemical and physical properties of the element could
be determined. Ytterbium has a bright silvery luster, is soft, malleable, and quite ductile. While the element is fairly stable, it should be kept in closed
containers to protect it from air and moisture. Ytterbium is readily attacked and dissolved by dilute and concentrated mineral acids and reacts slowly
with water. Ytterbium has three allotropic forms with transformation points at –13° and 795°C. The beta form is a room-temperature, face-centered,
cubic modification, while the high-temperature gamma form is a body-centered cubic form. Another body-centered cubic phase has recently been
found to be stable at high pressures at room temperatures. The beta form ordinarily has metallic-type conductivity, but becomes a semiconductor when
the pressure is increased above 16,000 atm. The electrical resistance increases tenfold as the pressure is increased to 39,000 atm and drops to about
80% of its standard temperature-pressure resistivity at a pressure of 40,000 atm. Natural ytterbium is a mixture of seven stable isotopes. Twenty six
other unstable isotopes and isomers are known. Ytterbium metal has possible use in improving the grain refinement, strength, and other mechanical
properties of stainless steel. One isotope is reported to have been used as a radiation source as a substitute for a portable X-ray machine where electricity
is unavailable. Few other uses have been found. Ytterbium metal is available with a purity of about 99.9% for about $10/g. Ytterbium has a low acute
toxic rating, but may present a carcinogenic hazard.
Yttrium — (Ytterby, village in Sweden near Vauxholm), Y; at. wt. 88.90585(2); at. no. 39; m.p. 1522°C; b.p. 3345°C; sp. gr. 4.469 (25°C); valence
3. Yttria, which is an earth containing yttrium, was discovered by Gadolin in 1794. Ytterby is the site of a quarry which yielded many unusually minerals
containing rare earths and other elements. This small town, near Stockholm, bears the honor of giving names to erbium, terbium, and ytterbium as well
as yttrium. In 1843 Mosander showed that yttria could be resolved into the oxides (or earths) of three elements. The name yttria was reserved for the
most basic one; the others were named erbia and terbia. Yttrium occurs in nearly all of the rare-earth minerals. Analysis of lunar rock samples obtained
during the Apollo missions show a relatively high yttrium content. It is recovered commercially from monazite sand, which contains about 3%, and
from bastnasite, which contains about 0.2%. Wohler obtained the impure element in 1828 by reduction of the anhydrous chloride with potassium. The
metal is now produced commercially by reduction of the fluoride with calcium metal. It can also be prepared by other techniques. Yttrium has a silver-
metallic luster and is relatively stable in air. Turnings of the metal, however, ignite in air if their temperature exceeds 400°C, and finely divided yttrium
is very unstable in air. Yttrium oxide is one of the most important compounds of yttrium and accounts for the largest use. It is widely used in making
YVO4 europium, and Y2O3 europium phosphors to give the red color in color television tubes. Many hundreds of thousands of pounds are now used
in this application. Yttrium oxide also is used to produce yttrium-iron-garnets, which are very effective microwave filters. Yttrium iron, aluminum,
and gadolinium garnets, with formulas such as Y3Fe5O12 and Y3Al5O12, have interesting magnetic properties. Yttrium iron garnet is also exceptionally
efficient as both a transmitter and transducer of acoustic energy. Yttrium aluminum garnet, with a hardness of 8.5, is also finding use as a gemstone
(simulated diamond). Small amounts of yttrium (0.1 to 0.2%) can be used to reduce the grain size in chromium, molybdenum, zirconium, and titanium,
and to increase strength of aluminum and magnesium alloys. Alloys with other useful properties can be obtained by using yttrium as an additive. The
metal can be used as a deoxidizer for vanadium and other nonferrous metals. The metal has a low cross section for nuclear capture. 90Y, one of the
isotopes of yttrium, exists in equilibrium with its parent 90Sr, a product of atomic explosions. Yttrium has been considered for use as a nodulizer for
producing nodular cast iron, in which the graphite forms compact nodules instead of the usual flakes. Such iron has increased ductility. Yttrium is also
finding application in laser systems and as a catalyst for ethylene polymerization.It has also potential use in ceramic and glass formulas, as the oxide
has a high melting point and imparts shock resistance and low expansion characteristics to glass. Natural yttrium contains but one isotope, 89Y. Forty-
three other unstable isotopes and isomers have been characterized. Yttrium metal of 99.9% purity is commercially available at a cost of about $5/g.
Zinc — (Ger. Zink, of obscure origin), Zn; at. wt. 65.39(2); at. no. 30; m.p. 419.53°C; b.p. 907°C; sp. gr. 7.133 (25°C); valence 2. Centuries before
zinc was recognized as a distinct element, zinc ores were used for making brass. Tubal-Cain, seven generations from Adam, is mentioned as being
an “instructor in every artificer in brass and iron.” An alloy containing 87% zinc has been found in prehistoric ruins in Transylvania. Metallic zinc
was produced in the 13th century A.D. in India by reducing calamine with organic substances such as wool. The metal was rediscovered in Europe
by Marggraf in 1746, who showed that it could be obtained by reducing calamine with charcoal. The principal ores of zinc are sphalerite or blende
(sulfide), smithsonite (carbonate), calamine (silicate), and franklinite (zinc, manganese, iron oxide). Canada, Japan, Belgium, Germany, and The
Netherlands are suppliers of zinc ores. Zinc is also mined in Alaska, Tennessee, Missouri, and elsewhere in the U.S. Zinc can be obtained by roasting
its ores to form the oxide and by reduction of the oxide with coal or carbon, with subsequent distillation of the metal. Other methods of extraction are
possible. Naturally occurring zinc contains five stable isotopes. Twenty-five other unstable isotopes and isomers are recognized. Zinc is a bluish-white,
lustrous metal. It is brittle at ordinary temperatures but malleable at 100 to 150°C. It is a fair conductor of electricity, and burns in air at high red heat
with evolution of white clouds of the oxide. The metal is employed to form numerous alloys with other metals. Brass, nickel silver, typewriter metal,
commercial bronze, spring brass, German silver, soft solder, and aluminum solder are some of the more important alloys. Large quantities of zinc are


--- PAGE 739 ---
TeamLRN
4-37
PHYSICAL CONSTANTS OF INORGANIC COMPOUNDS
The compounds in this table were selected on the basis of their laboratory and industrial importance, as well as their value in illustrating trends in
the variation of physical properties with position in the periodic table. An effort has been made to include the most frequently encountered inor-
ganic substances; a limited number of organometallics are also covered. Many, if not most, of the compounds that are solids at ambient temperature
can exist in more than one crystalline modiﬁcation.  The information given here applies to the most stable or common crystalline form.  In cases
where two or more forms are of practical importance, separate entries will be found in the table.
Compounds are arranged primarily in alphabetical order by the most commonly used name. However, adjustments are made in many instances in
order to bring closely related compounds together.  For example, hydrides of elements such as boron, silicon, and germanium are grouped together
immediately following the entry for the parent element, since they would otherwise be scattered throughout the table.  Likewise, the oxoacids of an
element are given in one group whenever a strict alphabetical order would separate them (e.g., sulfuric acid and ﬂuorosulfuric acid). The Formula
Index following the table provides another means of locating a compound. There is also an index to CAS Registry Numbers.
The following data ﬁelds appear in the table:
•
Name: Systematic name for the substance.  The valence state of a metallic element is indicated by a Roman numeral, e.g., copper in
the +1 state is written as copper(I) rather than cuprous, iron in the +3 state is iron(III) rather than ferric.
•
Formula: The simplest descriptive formula is given, but this does not necessarily specify the actual structure of the compound. For
example, aluminum chloride is designated as AlCl3, even though a more accurate representation of the structure in the solid phase
(and, under some conditions, in the gas phase) is Al2Cl6. A few exceptions are made, such as the use of Hg2
+2 for the mercury(I) ion.
•
CAS Registry Number: Chemical Abstracts Service Registry Number.  An asterisk (*) following the CAS RN for a hydrate indi-
cates that the number refers to the anhydrous compound.  In most cases the generic CAS RN for the compound is given rather than
the number for a speciﬁc crystalline form or mineral.
•
Mol. Weight: Molecular weight (relative molar mass) as calculated with the 1997 IUPAC Recommended Atomic Weights.  The
number of decimal places corresponds to the number of places in the atomic weight of the least accurately known element (e.g., one
place for lead compounds, two places for compounds of selenium, germanium, etc.); a maximum of three places is given.  For com-
pounds of radioactive elements for which IUPAC makes no recommendation, the mass number of the isotope with longest half-life
is used, and the result is rounded to the nearest integer.
•
Physical Form: The crystal system is given, when available, for compounds that are solid at room temperature, together with color
and other descriptive features. Abbreviations are listed below.
•
mp: Normal melting point in ˚C. The notation “tp” indicates the temperature at which solid, liquid, and gas are in equilibrium at
a pressure greater than one atmosphere (i.e., the normal melting point does not exist).  When available, the triple point pressure
is listed.
•
bp: Normal boiling point in ˚C (referred to 101.325 kPa or 760 mmHg pressure).  The notation “sp” following the number indicates
the temperature where the  pressure of the vapor in equilibrium with the solid reaches as 101.325 kPa.  See Reference 8, p. 23, for
further discussion of sublimation points and triple points.  A notation “sublimes” without a temperature being given indicates that
there is a perceptible sublimation pressure above the solid at ambient temperatures. 
•
Density: Density values for solids and liquids are always in units of grams per cubic centimeter and can be assumed to refer to tem-
peratures near room temperature unless otherwise stated.  Values for gases are the calculated ideal gas densities in grams per liter at
25˚C and 101.325 kPa; the unit is always speciﬁed for a gas value.
•
Aqueous Solubility: Solubility is expressed as the number of grams of the compound (excluding any water of hydration) that will
dissolve in 100 g of water. The temperature in ˚C is given as a superscript. Solubility at other temperatures can be found for many
compounds in the table “Aqueous Solubility of Inorganic Compounds at Various Temperatures” in Section 8.
•
Qualitative Solubility: Qualitative information on the solubility in other solvents (and in water, if quantitative data are unavailable)
is given here. The abbreviations are:
i
insoluble
sl
slightly soluble
s 
soluble
vs
very soluble
Data were taken from a wide variety of reliable sources, including monographs, treatises, review articles, evaluated compilations and databases,
and in some cases the primary literature. Some of the most useful references for the properties covered here are listed below.
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
Ac
acetyl
ace
acetone
acid
acid solutions
alk
alkaline solutions
amorp
amorphous
anh
anhydrous
aq
aqueous
blk
black
brn
brown
bz
benzene
chl
chloroform
col
colorless
conc
concentrated
cry
crystals, crystalline
cub
cubic
cyhex
cyclohexane
dec
decomposes
dil
dilute
diox
dioxane
eth
ethyl ether
EtOH
ethanol
exp
explodes, explosive
ﬂam
ﬂammable
gl
glass, glassy


--- PAGE 740 ---
4-38
PHYSICAL CONSTANTS OF INORGANIC COMPOUNDS (CONTINUED)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS (CONTINUED)
grn
green
hc
hydrocarbon solvents
hex
hexagonal
hp
heptane
hex
hexane
hyd
hydrate
hyg
hygroscopic
i
insoluble in
liq
liquid
MeOH
methanol
mono
monoclinic
octahed
octahedral
oran
orange
orth
orthorhombic
os
organic solvents
peth
petroleum ether
pow
powder
prec
precipitate
pur
purple
py
pyridine
reac
reacts with
refrac
refractory
rhom
rhombohedral
s
soluble in
silv
silvery
sl
slightly soluble in
soln
solution
sp
sublimation point
stab
stable
subl
sublimes
temp
temperature
tetr
tetragonal
thf
tetrahydrofuran
tol
toluene
tp
triple point
trans
transition, transformation
tricl
triclinic
trig
trigonal
unstab
unstable
viol
violet
visc
viscous
vs
very soluble in
wh
white
xyl
xylene
yel
yellow
REFERENCES
1. Phillips, S. L., and Perry, D.L., Handbook of Inorganic Compounds, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1995.
2. Trotman-Dickenson, A. F., Executive Editor, Comprehensive Inorganic Chemistry, Vol. 1-5, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1973.
3. Greenwood, N. N., and Earnshaw, A., Chemistry of the Elements, Second Edition, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, 1997.
4. Budavari, S., Editor, The Merck Index, Twelfth Edition, Merck & Co., Rahway, NJ, 1996.
5. GMELIN Handbook of Inorganic and Organometallic Chemistry, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg.
6. Chase, M.W., Davies, C.A., Downey, J.R., Frurip, D. J., McDonald, R.A., and Syverud, A.N., JANAF Thermochemical Tables, Third Edition,
J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, Vol. 14, Suppl. 1, 1985; Chase, M. W., NIST-JANAF Thermochemical Tables, Fourth Edition, J. Phys. Chem. Ref.
Data, Monograph No. 9, 1998.
7. Donnay, J.D.H., and Ondik, H.M., Crystal Data Determinative Tables, Third Edition, Volumes 2 and 4, Inorganic Compounds, Joint Commit-
tee on Powder Diffraction Standards, Swarthmore, PA, 1973.
8. Lide, D. R., and Kehiaian, H.V., CRC Handbook of Thermophysical and Thermochemical Data, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1994.
9. Kirk-Othmer Concise Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1985.
10. Dictionary of Inorganic Compounds, Chapman & Hall, New York, 1992.
11. Massalski, T. B., Editor, Binary Alloy Phase Diagrams, 2nd Edition, ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio, 1990.
12. Landolt-Börnstein, Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in Science and Technology, Sixth Edition, II/4, Caloric Quantities of State,
Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1961.
13. Deer, W. A., Howie, R.A., and Zussman, J., An Introduction to the Rock-Forming Minerals, 2nd Edition, Longman Scientiﬁc & Technical,
Harlow, Essex, 1992.
14. Carmichael, R. S., Practical Handbook of Physical Properties of Rocks and Minerals, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1989.
15.  Dinsdale, A.T., “SGTE Data for Pure Elements”, CALPHAD, 15, 317-425, 1991.
16. Madelung, O., Semiconductors: Group IV Elements and III-IV Compounds, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1991.
17. Daubert, T.E., Danner, R. P., Sibul, H.M., and Stebbins, C.C., Physical and Thermodynamic Properties of Pure Compounds: Data Compila-
tion, extant 1994 (core with 4 supplements), Taylor & Francis, Bristol, PA.
18. Lidin, R. A., Andreeva, L. L., and Molochko, V. A., Constants of Inorganic Substances, Begell House, New York, 1995.
19. Gurvich, L. V., Veyts, I. V., and Alcock, C. B., Thermodynamic Properties of Individual Substances, Fourth Edition, Hemisphere Publishing
Corp., New York, 1989.
20. The Combined Chemical Dictionary on CDROM, Chapman & Hall/CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2000.



--- PAGE 801 ---
TeamLRN
4-114
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF THE RARE EARTH METALS (continued)
Table 4
High Temperature Transition Temperatures and Melting Point of Rare Earth Metals
Transition I
Transition II
Rare
(α – β)a
(β – γ)a
Melting
earth
Temp.
Temp.
point
metal
(°C)
Phases
(C°)
Phases
(C°)
Sc
1337
hcp 1 bcc
—
—
1541
Y
1478
hcp 1 bcc
—
—
1522
Lab
310
dhcp → fcc
865
fcc 1 bcc
918
Cec,d
139
dhcp → fcc (β - γ)
726
fcc 1 bcc (γ - δ)
798
Pr
795
dhcp 1 bcc
—
—
931
Nd
863
dhcp 1 bcc
—
—
1021
Pm
890
dhcp 1 bcc
—
—
1042
Sme
734
rhom → hcp
922
hcp 1 bcc
1074
Eu
—
—
—
—
822
Gd
1235
hcp 1 bcc
—
—
1313
Tb
1289
hcp 1 bcc
—
—
1356
Dy
1381
hcp 1 bcc
—
—
1412
Ho
—
—
—
—
1474
Er
—
—
—
—
1529
Tm
—
—
—
—
1545
Yb
795
fcc 1  bcc (β - γ)
—
—
819
Lu
—
—
—
—
1663
Note:  For additional information, see Gschneidner, K.A., Jr. and Calderwood, F.W., in Handbook on the Physics and Chemistry of Rare Earths, Vol.
8, Gschneidner, K.A., Jr. and Eyring, L., Eds., North-Holland Physics, Amsterdam, 1986; Gschneidner, K.A., Jr., Pecharsky, V.K., Cho, Jaephil
and Martin, S.W., Scripta Mater., 34, 1717, 1996.
a  For all the transformations listed, unless otherwise noted.
b  On cooling, fcc → dhcp (β → α), 260°C.
c  The β 1  γ equilibrium transition temperature is 10 ± 5°C.
d  On cooling, fcc → dhcp (γ → β), –16°C.
e  On cooling, hcp → rhomb (β → α), 727°C.
Table 5
Low Temperature Transition Temperatures of the Rare Earth Metals
Rare earth
Cooling
metal
Transformation
°C
K
Ce
γ → βa
–16
257
γ → α
–172
101
β → α
–228
45
Tb
α → α′
–53
220
Dy
α→ α′
–187
86
Yb
β → α
–13
260
Rare earth
Heating
metal
Transformation
°C
K
Ce
α → β
–148
125
α → β + γ
–104
169
β → γa
139
412
Yb
α → β
7
280
Note:  For additional information, see Beaudry, B.J. and Gschneidner, K.A., Jr., in Handbook on the Physics and Chemistry of Rare Earths,
Vol. 1, Gschneidner, K.A., Jr. and Eyring, L., Eds., North-Holland Physics, Amsterdam, 1978, 173. Koskenmaki, D.C. and
Gschneidner, K.A., Jr., 1978, in Handbook on the Physics and Chemistry of Rare Earths, Vol. 1, Gschneidner, K.A., Jr. and Eyring,
L., Eds., North-Holland Physics, Amsterdam, 1978, 337. Gschneidner, K.A., Jr., Pecharsky, V.K., Cho, Jaephil and Martin, S.W.,
Scripta Mater., 34, 1717, 1996.
a  The β 1 γ equilibrium transition temperature is 10 ± 5°C (283 ± 5K).


--- PAGE 802 ---
4-115
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF THE RARE EARTH METALS (continued)
Table 6
Heat Capacity, Standard Entropy, Heats of Transformation, and Fusion of the Rare Earth Metals
Heat
Standard
Rare
capacity at
entropy
Heat of transformation
Heat of
earth
298 K
S°298
(kJ/mol)
fusion
metal
(J/mol K)
(J/mol K)
trans. 1
∆Htr1
trans. 2
∆Htr2
(kJ/mol)
Sc
25.5
34.6
α 1 β
4.00
—
—
14.1
Y
26.5
44.4
α 1 β
4.99
—
—
11.4
La
27.1
56.9
α 1 β
0.36
β 1 γ
3.12
6.20
Ce
26.9
72.0
β 1 γ
0.05
γ 1 δ
2.99
5.46
Pr
27.2
73.2
α 1 β
3.17
—
—
6.89
Nd
27.5
71.5
α 1 β
3.03
—
—
7.14
Pm
27.3a
71.6a
α 1 β
3.0a
—
—
7.7a
Sm
29.5
69.6
α 1 β
0.2a
β 1 γ
3.11
8.62
Eu
27.7
77.8
—
—
—
—
9.21
Gd
37.0
68.1
α 1 β
3.91
—
—
10.0
Tb
28.9
73.2
α 1 β
5.02
—
—
10.79
Dy
27.7
75.6
α 1 β
4.16
—
—
11.06
Ho
27.2
75.3
—
—
—
—
17.0a
Er
28.1
73.2
—
—
—
—
19.9
Tm
27.0
74.0
—
—
—
—
16.8
Yb
26.7
59.9
β 1 γ
1.75
—
—
7.66
Lu
26.9
51.0
—
—
—
—
22a
Note:  For additional information, see Hultgren, R., Desai, P.D., Hawkins, D.T., Gleiser, M., Kelley, K.K., and Wagman, D.D., Selected Values of the Thermodynamic
Properties of the Elements, ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio, 1973; Wagman, D.D., Evans, W.H., Parker, V.B., Schumm, R.H., Halow, I., Bailey, S.M.,
Churney, K.L., and Nuttall, R.L., The NBS Tables of Chemical Thermodynamic Properties, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, Vol. 11, Suppl 2, 1982; Amitin, E.B.,
Bessergenev, W.G., Kovalevskaya, Yu. A., and Paukov, I.E., J. Chem. Thermodyn., 15, 181, 1983; Amitin, E.B., Bessergenev, W.G., Kovalevskaya, Yu. A., and
Paukov, I.E., J. Chem. Thermodyn., 15, 181, 1983.
a  Estimated.
Table 7
Vapor Pressures, Boiling Points, and Heats of Sublimation of Rare Earth Metals
Heat of
Rare
Temperature in °Ca for a vapor pressure of
Boiling
sublimation
earth
10–8 atm
10–6 atm
10–4 atm
10–2 atm
pointa
at 25°C
metal
(0.001 Pa)
(0.101 Pa)
(10.1Pa)
(1013 Pa)
(°C)
(kJ/mol)
Sc
1036
1243
1533
1999
2836
377.8
Y
1222
1460
1812
2360
3345
424.7
La
1301
1566
1938
2506
3464
431.0
Ce
1290
1554
1926
2487
3443
422.6
Pr
1083
1333
1701
2305
3520
355.6
Nd
955
1175
1500
2029
3074
327.6
Pm
—
—
—
—
3000b
348b
Sm
508
642
835
1150
1794
206.7
Eu
399
515
685
964
1529
175.3
Gd
1167
1408
1760
2306
3273
397.5
Tb
1124
1354
1698
2237
3230
388.7
Dy
804
988
1252
1685
2567
290.4
Ho
845
1036
1313
1771
2700
300.8
Er
908
1113
1405
1896
2868
317.1
Tm
599
748
964
1300
1950
232.2
Yb
301
400
541
776
1196
152.1
Lu
1241
1483
1832
2387
3402
427.6
Note:  For additional information, see Hultgren, R., Desai, P.D., Hawkins, D.T., Gleiser, M., Kelley, K.K., and Wagman, D.D., Selected Values of the Thermodynamic
Properties of the Elements, ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio, 1973 and Beaudry, B.J. and Gschneidner, K.A., Jr., in Handbook on the Physics and Chemistry
of Rare Earths, Vol. 1, Gschneidner, K.A., Jr. and Eyring, L., Eds., North-Holland Physics, Amsterdam, 1978, 173.
a  International Temperature Scale of 1990 (ITS-90) values.
b  Estimated.


--- PAGE 807 ---
TeamLRN
4-120
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF THE RARE EARTH METALS (continued)
Table 12
Liquid Metal Properties Near the Melting Point
Magnetic
Spectral emittance
Rare
Surface
Heat
Thermal
susceptibility
Electrical
at λ = 645 nm
earth
Density
tension
Viscosity
capacity
conductivity
χ × 104
resistivity
∆VL→sa
ε
Temp. range
metal
(g/cm3)
(N/m)
(centipoise)
(J/mol K)
(W/cm K)
(emu/mol)
(µΩ⋅cm)
(%)
(%)
(°C)
Sc
2.80
0.954
—
44.2b
—
—
—
—
—
—
Y
4.24
0.871
—
43.1
—
—
—
—
36.8
1522–1647
La
5.96
0.718
2.65
34.3
0.238
1.20
133
–0.6
25.4
920–1287
Ce
6.68
0.706
3.20
37.7
0.210
9.37
130
+1.1
32.2
877–1547
Pr
6.59
0.707
2.85
43.0
0.251
17.3
139
–0.02
28.4
931–1537
Nd
6.72
0.687
—
48.8
0.195
18.7
151
–0.9
39.4
1021–1567
Pm
6.9b
0.680b
—
50b
—
—
160b
—
—
—
Sm
7.16
0.431
—
50.2b
—
18.3
182
–3.6
43.7
1075
Eu
4.87
0.264
—
38.1
—
97
242
–4.8
—
—
Gd
7.4
0.664
—
37.2
0.149
67
195
–2.0
34.2
1313–1600
Tb
7.65
0.669
—
46.5
—
82
193
–3.1
—
—
Dy
8.2
0.648
—
49.9
0.187
95
210
–4.5
29.7
1412–1437
Ho
8.34
0.650
—
43.9
—
88
221
–7.4
—
—
Er
8.6
0.637
—
38.7
—
69
226
–9.0
37.2
1529–1587
Tm
9.0b
—
—
41.4
—
41
235b
–6.9
—
—
Yb
6.21
0.320
2.67
36.8
—
—
113
–5.1
—
—
Lu
9.3
0.940
—
47.9b
—
—
224
–3.6
—
—
Note:  For additional information, see Van Zytveld, J., in Handbook on the Physics and Chemistry of Rare Earths, Vol. 12, Gschneidner, K.A., Jr. and Eyring, L., Eds., North-Holland Physics, Amsterdam,
1989, 357. Stretz, L.A. and Bautista, R.G., in Temperature, Its Measurement and Control in Science and Industry, Vol. 4, part I, H.H. Plumb, Ed., Instrument Society of America, Pittsburgh,
1972, 489. King, T.S., Baria, D.N., and Bautista, R.G., Met. Trans. B, 7, 411, 1976. Baria, D.N., King, T.S., and Bautista, R.G., Met. Trans. B, 7, 577, 1976.
a  Volume change on freezing.
b  Estimated.


--- PAGE 809 ---
TeamLRN
4-1
MELTING, BOILING, TRIPLE, AND CRITICAL POINT TEMPERATURES OF THE ELEMENTS
This table summarizes the signiﬁcant points on the phase diagrams for the elements for which data are available. Values are given for the solid-
liquid-gas triple point ttp, normal melting point tm, normal boiling point tb, and critical temperature tc; all are on the ITS-90 scale. An “sp” notation
indicates a sublimation point, where the vapor pressure of the solid phase reaches 101.325 kPa (1 atm). Transition temperatures between allotropic
forms are included for several elements. The major data sources are listed below; values from Reference 1, which deals with reference points on
the ITS-90 scale, were adopted when applicable.
REFERENCES
1. Bedford, R. E., Bonnier, G., Maas, H., and Pavese, F., Metrologia 33, 133, 1996.
2. Dinsdale, A.T., “SGTE Data for Pure Elements,” CALPHAD, 15, 317-425, 1991.
3. Chase, M.W., Davies, C.A., Downey, J.R., Frurip, D.J., McDonald, R.A., and Syverud, A.N., JANAF Thermochemical Tables, Third Edition,
J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, Vol. 14, Suppl. 1, 1985.
4. Gurvich, L.V., Veyts, I.V., and Alcock, C.B., Thermodynamic Properties of Individual Substances, Fourth Edition, Hemisphere Publishing
Corp., New York, 1989.
5. Greenwood, N. N., and Earnshaw, A., Chemistry of the Elements, Second Edition, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, 1997. 
Element
ttp/˚C
tm/˚C
tb/˚C
tc/˚C
Actinium
1051
3198
Aluminum
660.32
2519
Americium
1176
2011
Antimony
630.628
1587
Argon
-189.36 (69 kPa)
-185.847
-122.28
Arsenic (gray)
817 (3.70 MPa)
603 sp
1400
Astatine
302
Barium
727
1897
Berkelium ( form)
1050
Berkelium ( form)
986
Beryllium
1287
2471
Bismuth
271.402
1564
Boron
2075
4000
Bromine
-7.2
58.8
315
Cadmium
321.069
767
Calcium
842
1484
Californium
900
Carbon (graphite)
4489 (10.3 MPa)
3825 sp
Carbon (diamond)
4440 (12.4 GPa)
Cerium
798
3443
Cesium
28.5
671
1665
Chlorine
-101.5
-34.04
143.8
Chromium
1907
2671
Cobalt
1495
2927
Copper
1084.62
2562
Curium
1345
˜3100
Dysprosium
1412
2567
Einsteinium
860
Erbium
1529
2868
Europium
822
1529
Fermium
1527
Fluorine
-219.67
-188.12
-129.02
Francium
27
Gadolinium
1313
3273
Gallium
29.7666
2204
Germanium
938.25
2833
Gold
1064.18
2856
Hafnium
2233
4603
Helium
-268.93
-267.96
Holmium
1474
2700


--- PAGE 816 ---
DENSITY OF MOLTEN ELEMENTS AND REPRESENTATIVE SALTS
This table lists the liquid density at the melting point, ρm , for elements that are solid at room temperature, as well as for some representative salts
of these elements. Densities at higher temperatures (up to the tmax given in the last column) may be estimated from the equation
ρ(t) = ρm - k(t-tm)
where tm is the melting point and k is given in the fifth column of the table. If a value of tmax is not given, the equation should not be used to extrapolate
more than about 20°C beyond the melting point.
Data for the elements were selected from the primary literature; the assistance of Gernot Lang in compiling these data is gratefully acknowledged.
The molten salt data were derived from Reference 1.
REFERENCE
1. Janz, G. J., Thermodynamic and Transport Properties of Molten Salts: Correlation Equations for Critically Evaluated Density, Surface Tension,
Electrical Conductance, and Viscosity Data, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 17, Suppl. 2, 1988.
2. Nasch, P. M., and Steinemann, S. G., Phys. Chem. Liq., 29, 43, 1995.
Formula
Name
tm/°C
ρm/g cm–3
k/g cm–3 °C–1
tmax
Ag
Silver
961.78
9.320
0.0009
1500
AgBr
Silver(I) bromide
432
5.577
0.001035
667
AgCl
Silver(I) chloride
455
4.83
0.00094
627
AgI
Silver(I) iodide
558
5.58
0.00101
802
AgNO3
Silver(I) nitrate
212
3.970
0.001098
360
Ag2SO4
Silver(I) sulfate
652
4.84
0.001089
770
Al
Aluminum
660.32
2.375
0.000233
1340
AlBr3
Aluminum bromide
97.5
2.647
0.002435
267
AlCl3
Aluminum chloride
192.6
1.302
0.002711
296
AlI3
Aluminum iodide
188.32
3.223
0.0025
240
As
Arsenic
817
5.22
0.000544
Au
Gold
1064.18
17.31
0.001343
1200
B
Boron
2075
2.08
Ba
Barium
727
3.338
0.000299
1550
BaBr2
Barium bromide
857
3.991
0.000924
900
BaCl2
Barium chloride
962
3.174
0.000681
1081
BaF2
Barium fluoride
1368
4.14
0.000999
1727
BaI2
Barium iodide
711
4.26
0.000977
975
Be
Beryllium
1287
1.690
0.00011
BeCl2
Beryllium chloride
415
1.54
0.0011
473
BeF2
Beryllium fluoride
552
1.96
0.000015
850
Bi
Bismuth
271.40
10.05
0.00135
800
BiBr3
Bismuth bromide
218
4.76
0.002637
927
BiCl3
Bismuth chloride
230
3.916
0.0023
350
Ca
Calcium
842
1.378
0.000230
1484
CaBr2
Calcium bromide
742
3.111
0.0005
791
CaCl2
Calcium chloride
775
2.085
0.000422
950
CaF2
Calcium fluoride
1418
2.52
0.000391
2027
CaI2
Calcium iodide
783
3.443
0.000751
1028
Cd
Cadmium
321.07
7.996
0.001218
500
CdBr2
Cadmium bromide
568
4.075
0.00108
720
CdCl2
Cadmium chloride
564
3.392
0.00082
807
CdI2
Cadmium iodide
387
4.396
0.001117
700
Ce
Cerium
799
6.55
0.000710
1460
CeCl3
Cerium(III) chloride
817
3.25
0.00092
950
CeF3
Cerium(III) fluoride
1430
4.659
0.000936
1927
Co
Cobalt
1495
7.75
0.00165
1580
Cr
Chromium
1907
6.3
0.0011
2100
Cs
Cesium
28.44
1.843
0.000556
510
CsBr
Cesium bromide
636
3.133
0.001223
860
CsCl
Cesium chloride
645
2.79
0.001065
906
CsF
Cesium fluoride
703
3.649
0.001282
912
CsI
Cesium iodide
621
3.197
0.001183
907
4-126


--- PAGE 826 ---
4-136
INDEX OF REFRACTION OF INORGANIC LIQUIDS
This table gives the index of refraction n of several inorganic substances in the liquid state at specified temperatures. The measurements refer to
ambient atmospheric pressure except for substances whose normal boiling points are greater than the indicated temperature; in this case the pressure
is the saturated vapor pressure of the substance. All values refer to a wavelength of 589 nm unless otherwise indicated. Entries are arranged in
alphabetical order by chemical formula as normally written.
Data on the index of refraction at other temperatures and wavelengths may be found in Reference 1.
REFERENCES
1. Wohlfarth, C., and Wohlfarth, B., Landolt-Börnstein, Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in Science and Technology, New Series,
III/38A, Martienssen, W., Editor, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1996.
2. Francis, A.W., J. Chem. Eng. Data, 5, 534, 1960.
Formula
Name
t/°C
n
Ar
Argon
-188
1.2312
AsCl3
Arsenic(III) chloride
16
1.604
BBr3
Boron tribromide
16
1.312
BrF3
Bromine trifluoride
25
1.4536
BrF5
Bromine pentafluoride
25
1.3529
Br2
Bromine
15
1.659
COS
Carbon oxysulfide
25
1.3506
CO2
Carbon dioxide
24
1.6630
CS2
Carbon disulfide
20
1.62774
C3O2
Carbon suboxide
0
1.453
Cl2
Chlorine
20
1.3834
CrO2Cl2
Chromyl chloride
23
1.524
Fe(CO)5
Iron pentacarbonyl
14
1.523
GeBr4
Germanium(IV) bromide
26
1.6269
GeCl4
Germanium(IV) chloride
25
1.4614
HBr
Hydrogen bromide
10
1.325
HCN
Hydrogen cyanide
20
1.26136
HCl
Hydrogen chloride
18
1.3287 a
HClO4
Perchloric acid
50
1.3819
HF
Hydrogen fluoride
25
1.1574
HI
Hydrogen iodide
16
1.466
HNO3
Nitric acid
25
1.393
H2
Hydrogen
-253
1.1096
H2O
Water
20
1.33336
H2O2
Hydrogen peroxide
28
1.4061
H2S
Hydrogen sulfide
-80
1.460
20
1.3682
H2SO4
Sulfuric acid
20
1.4183
H2S2
Hydrogen disulfide
20
1.630
He
Helium
-269
1.02451 c
Kr
Krypton
-157
1.3032 c
NH3
Ammonia
-77
1.3944 b
20
1.3327
NO
Nitric oxide
-90
1.330
N2
Nitrogen
-196
1.19876 b
N2H4
Hydrazine
22
1.470
N2O
Nitrous oxide
25
1.238
O2
Oxygen
-183
1.2243 c
PBr3
Phosphorus(III) bromide
25
1.687
PCl3
Phosphorus(III) chloride
21
1.5122
PH3
Phosphine
17
1.317
P2O3
Phosphorus(III) oxide
27
1.540
S
Sulfur
125
1.9170
SCl2
Sulfur dichloride
14
1.557
SF6
Sulfur hexafluoride
25
1.167
SOCl2
Thionyl chloride
10
1.527
SO2
Sulfur dioxide
25
1.3396
SO2Cl2
Sulfuryl chloride
12
1.444


--- PAGE 982 ---
Section 6: Fluid Properties
        Thermodynamic Properties of Air
        Properties of Water in the Range 0-100°C
        Enthalpy of Vaporization of Water
        Fixed Point Properties of H2O and D2O
        Thermal Conductivity of Saturated H2O and D2O
        Standard Density of Water
        Properties of Ice and Supercooled Water
        Volumetric Properties of Aqueous Sodium Chloride Solutions
        Density of D2O
        Vapor Pressure of Ice
        Vapor Pressure of Water from 0 to 370°C
        Boiling Point of Water at Various Pressures
        Melting Point of Ice as a Function of Pressure
        Properties of Water and Steam as a Function of Temperature and Pressure
        Permittivity (Dielectric Constant) of Water as a Function of Temperature and Pressure
        Permittivity (Dielectric Constant) of Water at Various Frequencies
        Thermophysical Properties of Fluids
        Virial Coefficients of Selected Gases
        Van der Waals Constants for Gases
        Mean Free Path and Related Properties of Gases
        Influence of Pressure on Freezing Points
        Critical Constants
        Sublimation Pressure of Solids
        Vapor Pressure
        Vapor Pressure of Fluids at Temperatures below 300 K
        Vapor Pressure of Saturated Salt Solutions
        IUPAC Recommended Data for Vapor Pressure Calibration
        Enthalpy of Vaporization
        Enthalpy of Fusion
        Pressure and Temperature Dependence of Liquid Density
        Properties of Cryogenic Fluids
        Properties of Liquid Helium
        Properties of Refrigerants
        Density and Specific Volume of Mercury
        Thermal Properties of Mercury
        Vapor Pressure of Mercury
        Surface Tension of Common Liquids
        Surface Tension of Aqueous Mixtures
        Permittivity (Dielectric Constant) of Liquids
        Permittivity (Dielectric Constant) of Gases
        Azeotropic Data for Binary Mixtures


--- PAGE 986 ---
PROPERTIES OF WATER IN THE RANGE  0 — 100 °C
This table summarizes the best available values of the density, specific heat capacity at constant pressure (Cp), vapor pressure, viscosity, thermal
conductivity, dielectric constant, and surface tension for liquid water in the range 0 — 100 °C. All values (except vapor pressure) refer to a pressure
of 100 kPa (1 bar). The temperature scale is IPTS-68.
t
Density
Cp
Vap. pres.
Visc.
Ther. cond.
Surf. ten.
°C
g/cm3
J/g K
kPa
µPa s
mW/K m
Diel. const.
mN/m
0
0.99984
4.2176
0.6113
1793
561.0
87.90
75.64
10
0.99970
4.1921
1.2281
1307
580.0
83.96
74.23
20
0.99821
4.1818
2.3388
1002
598.4
80.20
72.75
30
0.99565
4.1784
4.2455
797.7
615.4
76.60
71.20
40
0.99222
4.1785
7.3814
653.2
630.5
73.17
69.60
50
0.98803
4.1806
12.344
547.0
643.5
69.88
67.94
60
0.98320
4.1843
19.932
466.5
654.3
66.73
66.24
70
0.97778
4.1895
31.176
404.0
663.1
63.73
64.47
80
0.97182
4.1963
47.373
354.4
670.0
60.86
62.67
90
0.96535
4.2050
70.117
314.5
675.3
58.12
60.82
100
0.95840
4.2159
101.325
281.8
679.1
55.51
58.91
Ref.
1—3
2
1, 3
3
3
4
5
REFERENCES
1. L. Harr, J. S. Gallagher, and G. S. Kell, NBS/NRC Steam Tables, Hemisphere Publishing Corp., 1984.
2. K. N. Marsh, Ed., Recommended Reference Materials for the Realization of Physicochemical Properties, Blackwell Scientific Publications,
Oxford, 1987.
3. J. V. Sengers and J. T. R. Watson, Improved international formulations for the viscosity and thermal conductivity of water substance, J. Phys.
Chem. Ref. Data, 15, 1291, 1986.
4. D. G. Archer and P. Wang, The dielectric constant of water and Debye-Hückel limiting law slopes, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 19, 371, 1990.
5. N. B. Vargaftik, et al., International tables of the surface tension of water, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 12, 817, 1983.


--- PAGE 988 ---
FIXED POINT PROPERTIES OF H2O AND D2O
Temperatures are given on the IPTS-68 scale.
REFERENCES
1. Haar, L., Gallagher, J.S., and Kell, G.S., NBS/NRC Steam Tables, Hemisphere Publishing Corp., 1984.
2. Levelt Sengers, J.M.H., Straub, J., Watanabe, K., and Hill, P.G., Assessment of critical parameter values for H2O and D2O, J. Phys. Chem.
Ref. Data, 14, 193, 1985.
3. Kestin, J. et. al., Thermophysical properties of fluid D2O, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 13, 601, 1984.
4. Kestin, J. et. al., Thermophysical properties of fluid H2O, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 13, 175, 1984.
5. Hill, P.G., MacMillan, R.D.C., and Lee, V., A fundamental equation of state for heavy water, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 11, 1, 1982.
Unit
H2O
D2O
Molar mass
g/mol
18.01528
20.02748
Melting point(101.325 kPa)
°C
0.00
3.82
Boiling point(101.325 kPa)
°C
100.00
101.42
Triple point temperature
°C
0.01
3.82
Triple point pressure
Pa
611.73
661
Triple point density(l)
g/cm3
0.99978
1.1055
Triple point density(g)
mg/L
4.885
5.75
Critical temperature
°C
373.99
370.74
Critical pressure
MPa
22.064
21.671
Critical density
g/cm3
0.322
0.356
Critical specific volume
cm3/g
3.11
2.81
Maximum density(saturated liquid)
g/cm3
0.99995
1.1053
Temperature of maximum density
°C
4.0
11.2


--- PAGE 991 ---
TeamLRN
6-6
PROPERTIES OF ICE AND SUPERCOOLED WATER
The common form of ice at ambient temperature and pressure is hexagonal ice, designated as ice Ih (see phase diagram in Section 12). The data given
here refer to that form. Data have been taken from the references indicated; values have been interpolated and smoothed in some cases. All properties
are sensitive to the method of preparation of the sample, since air or other gases are sometimes occluded.  For this reason there is often disagreement
among values found in the literature.
Density values (except at 0˚C) and the thermal expansion coefficient were calculated from the temperature variation in the crystal lattice constants
of ice (see Ref. 1). The thermal expansion coefficient appears to become negative around -200˚C, but there is considerable scatter in the data.
Density of ice Ih and supercooled water in g cm-3
t/˚C
ρ (ice)
ρ (supercooled water)
0
0.9167
0.9998
-10
0.9187
0.9982
-20
0.9203
0.9935
-30
0.9216
0.9839
-40
0.9228
-50
0.9240
-60
0.9252
-80
0.9274
-100
0.9292
-120
0.9305
-140
0.9314
-160
0.9331
-180
0.9340
Ref.
1
8
Phase transition properties:
∆fusH(0˚C) = 333.6 J/g (Ref. 2)
∆subH(0˚C) = 2838 J/g  (Ref. 2)
Other properties of ice Ih :
αV: cubic thermal expansion coefficient,  αV  =  −(1/V)(∂V/∂t)p
κ : adiabatic compressibility, κ =  –(1/V)( ∂V/∂p)S
.ε : relative permittivity (dielectric constant)
k : thermal conductivity
cp: specific heat capacity at constant pressure


--- PAGE 992 ---
6-7
t/˚C
αV/10−6 ˚C-1
κ/10−5 MPa-1
ε
k/W cm-1 ˚C-1
cp/J g-1 ˚C-1
0
159
13.0
 91.6
0.0214
2.11
−10
155
12.8
 94.4
0.023
2.03
−20
149
12.7
 97.5
0.024
1.96
−30
143
12.5
 99.7
0.025
1.88
−40
137
12.4
101.9
0.026
1.80
−50
130
12.2
106.9
0.028
1.72
−60
122
12.1
119.5
0.030
1.65
−80
105
11.9
0.033
1.50
−100
85
11.6
0.037
1.36
−120
77
11.4
0.042
1.23
−140
60
11.3
0.049
1.10
−160
45
11.2
0.057
0.97
−180
30
11.1
0.070
0.83
−200
11.0
0.087
0.67
−220
10.9
0.118
0.50
−240
10.9
0.20
0.29
−250
10.9
0.32
0.17
Ref.
1,2,3,5
1,5
6
7
1
REFERENCES
1. Eisenberg, D., and Kauzmann, W., The Structure and Properties of Water, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1969.
2. Landolt-Börnstein, Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in Science and Technology, New Series, V/1b, Springer-Verlag,
Heidelberg, 1982.
3. LaPlaca, S., and Post, B., Acta Cryst., 13, 503, 1960. [Thermal expansion of lattice]
4. Brill, R., and Tippe, A., Acta Cryst., 23, 343, 1967. [Thermal expansion of lattice]
5. Leadbetter, A. J., Proc. Roy. Soc. A 287, 403, 1965.  [Compressibility and thermal expansion]
6. Auty, R. P., and Cole, R. H., J. Chem. Phys., 20, 1309, 1952.  [Dielectric constant]
7. Slack, G. A., Phys. Rev. B, 22, 3065, 1980.  [Thermal conductivity]
8. Hare, D. E., and Sorensen, C. M., J. Chem. Phys., 87, 4840, 1987.  [Supercooled water]
9. Hobbs, P. V., Ice Physics, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1974.
PROPERTIES OF ICE AND SUPERCOOLED WATER (continued)


--- PAGE 996 ---
6-8
VAPOR PRESSURE OF WATER FROM 0 TO 370° C
This table gives the vapor pressure of water at intervals of 1° C from the melting point to the critical point.
REFERENCE
Haar, L., Gallagher, J.S., and Kell, G.S., NBS/NRC Steam Tables, Hemisphere Publishing Corp., New York, 1984.
t/°C
P/kPa
0
0.61129
1
0.65716
2
0.70605
3
0.75813
4
0.81359
5
0.87260
6
0.93537
7
1.0021
8
1.0730
9
1.1482
10
1.2281
11
1.3129
12
1.4027
13
1.4979
14
1.5988
15
1.7056
16
1.8185
17
1.9380
18
2.0644
19
2.1978
20
2.3388
21
2.4877
22
2.6447
23
2.8104
24
2.9850
25
3.1690
26
3.3629
27
3.5670
28
3.7818
29
4.0078
30
4.2455
31
4.4953
32
4.7578
33
5.0335
34
5.3229
35
5.6267
36
5.9453
37
6.2795
38
6.6298
39
6.9969
40
7.3814
41
7.7840
42
8.2054
43
8.6463
44
9.1075
45
9.5898
46
10.094
47
10.620
48
11.171
49
11.745
50
12.344
51
12.970
52
13.623
t/°C
P/kPa
t/°C
P/kPa
t/°C
P/kPa
106
125.03
107
129.39
108
133.88
109
138.50
110
143.24
111
148.12
112
153.13
113
158.29
114
163.58
115
169.02
116
174.61
117
180.34
118
186.23
119
192.28
120
198.48
121
204.85
122
211.38
123
218.09
124
224.96
125
232.01
126
239.24
127
246.66
128
254.25
129
262.04
130
270.02
131
278.20
132
286.57
133
295.15
134
303.93
135
312.93
136
322.14
137
331.57
138
341.22
139
351.09
140
361.19
141
371.53
142
382.11
143
392.92
144
403.98
145
415.29
146
426.85
147
438.67
148
450.75
149
463.10
150
475.72
151
488.61
152
501.78
153
515.23
154
528.96
155
542.99
156
557.32
157
571.94
158
586.87
159
602.11
160
617.66
161
633.53
162
649.73
163
666.25
164
683.10
165
700.29
166
717.83
167
735.70
168
753.94
169
772.52
170
791.47
171
810.78
172
830.47
173
850.53
174
870.98
175
891.80
176
913.03
177
934.64
178
956.66
179
979.09
180
1001.9
181
1025.2
182
1048.9
183
1073.0
184
1097.5
185
1122.5
186
1147.9
187
1173.8
188
1200.1
189
1226.9
190
1254.2
191
1281.9
192
1310.1
193
1338.8
194
1368.0
195
1397.6
196
1427.8
197
1458.5
198
1489.7
199
1521.4
200
1553.6
201
1586.4
202
1619.7
203
1653.6
204
1688.0
205
1722.9
206
1758.4
207
1794.5
208
1831.1
209
1868.4
210
1906.2
211
1944.6
53
14.303
54
15.012
55
15.752
56
16.522
57
17.324
58
18.159
59
19.028
60
19.932
61
20.873
62
21.851
63
22.868
64
23.925
65
25.022
66
26.163
67
27.347
68
28.576
69
29.852
70
31.176
71
32.549
72
33.972
73
35.448
74
36.978
75
38.563
76
40.205
77
41.905
78
43.665
79
45.487
80
47.373
81
49.324
82
51.342
83
53.428
84
55.585
85
57.815
86
60.119
87
62.499
88
64.958
89
67.496
90
70.117
91
72.823
92
75.614
93
78.494
94
81.465
95
84.529
96
87.688
97
90.945
98
94.301
99
97.759
100
101.32
101
104.99
102
108.77
103
112.66
104
116.67
105
120.79


--- PAGE 998 ---
BOILING POINT OF WATER AT VARIOUS PRESSURES
Data are based on the equation of state recommended by the International Association for the Properties of Steam in 1984, as presented in Haar,
Gallagher, and Kell, NBS-NRC Steam Tables (Hemisphere Publishing Corp., New York, 1984). The temperature scale is IPTS-68.
Note that: 1 mbar = 100 Pa = 0.000986923 atmos = 0.750062 mmHg.
P/mbar
T/°C
P/mbar
T/°C
P/mbar
T/°C
P/mbar
T/°C
50
32.88
915
97.17
1013.25
100.00
1200
104.81
100
45.82
920
97.32
1015
100.05
1250
105.99
150
53.98
925
97.47
1020
100.19
1300
107.14
200
60.07
930
97.62
1025
100.32
1350
108.25
250
64.98
935
97.76
1030
100.46
1400
109.32
300
69.11
940
97.91
1035
100.60
1450
110.36
350
72.70
945
98.06
1040
100.73
1500
111.38
400
75.88
950
98.21
1045
100.87
1550
112.37
450
78.74
955
98.35
1050
101.00
1600
113.33
500
81.34
960
98.50
1055
101.14
1650
114.26
550
83.73
965
98.64
1060
101.27
1700
115.18
600
85.95
970
98.78
1065
101.40
1750
116.07
650
88.02
975
98.93
1070
101.54
1800
116.94
700
89.96
980
99.07
1075
101.67
1850
117.79
750
91.78
985
99.21
1080
101.80
1900
118.63
800
93.51
990
99.35
1085
101.93
1950
119.44
850
95.15
995
99.49
1090
102.06
2000
120.24
900
96.71
1000
99.63
1095
102.19
2050
121.02
905
96.87
1005
99.77
1100
102.32
2100
121.79
910
97.02
1010
99.91
1150
103.59
2150
122.54


--- PAGE 999 ---
TeamLRN
MELTING POINT OF ICE AS A FUNCTION OF PRESSURE
This table gives values of the melting temperature of ice at various pressures, as calculated from the equation for the ice I - liquid water
phase boundary recommended by the International Association for the Properties of Steam (IAPS). Temperatures are on the ITS-90 scale. See the
Reference for information on forms of ice that exist at higher pressures. The transition points for transformations of the various forms of ice (in each
case in equilibrium with liquid water) are:
ice I - ice III
209.9 MPa
–21.985°C
ice III - ice V
350.1
–16.986
ice V - ice VI
632.4
0.16
ice VI - ice VII
2216
82
REFERENCE
Wagner, W., Saul, A., and Pruss, A., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 23, 515, 1994.
p/MPa
t/°C
0.1
0.00
1
-0.06
2
-0.14
3
-0.21
4
-0.29
5
-0.36
10
-0.74
20
-1.52
30
-2.32
40
-3.15
50
-4.02
60
-4.91
70
-5.83
80
-6.79
90
-7.78
100
-8.80
110
-9.86
120
-10.95
130
-12.07
140
-13.22
150
-14.40
160
-15.62
170
-16.85
180
-18.11
190
-19.39
200
-20.69
210
-22.00
p/MPa
t/°C
p/MPa
t/°C


--- PAGE 1000 ---
© 2000 CRC Press LLC
0.1 
273.16 
999.84 
0.10 
0.0000 
4.2194 
87.90
0.1 
300 
996.56 
112.65 
0.3931 
4.1806 
77.75
0.1 
325 
987.19 
217.15 
0.7276 
4.1819 
69.32
0.1 
350 
973.73 
321.84 
1.0380 
4.1945 
61.79
0.1 
372.76 
958.63 
417.50 
1.3028 
4.2152 
55.61
0.1 
372.76 
0.59034 
2674.9 
7.3588 
2.0784 
1.006
0.1 
375 
0.58653 
2679.6 
7.3713 
2.0686 
1.006
0.1 
400 
0.54761 
2730.4 
7.5025 
2.0078 
1.005
0.1 
450 
0.48458 
2829.7 
7.7365 
1.9752 
1.004
0.1 
500 
0.43514 
2928.6 
7.9447 
1.9813 
1.003
0.1 
550 
0.39507 
3028.1 
8.1344 
2.0010 
1.003
0.1 
600 
0.36185 
3128.8 
8.3096 
2.0268 
1.002
0.1 
650 
0.33384 
3230.8 
8.4730 
2.0557 
1.002
0.1 
700 
0.30988 
3334.4 
8.6264 
2.0867 
1.002
0.1 
750 
0.28915 
3439.5 
8.7715 
2.1191 
1.002
0.1 
800 
0.27102 
3546.3 
8.9093 
2.1525 
1.001
0.1 
850 
0.25504 
3654.8 
9.0408 
2.1868 
1.001
0.1 
900 
0.24085 
3765.0 
9.1668 
2.2216 
1.001
0.1 
950 
0.22815 
3876.9 
9.2879 
2.2568 
1.001
0.1 
1000 
0.21673 
3990.7 
9.4045 
2.2921 
1.001
0.1 
1050 
0.20640 
4106.1 
9.5172 
2.3273 
1.001
0.1 
1100 
0.19701 
4223.4 
9.6263 
2.3621 
1.001
0.1 
1150 
0.18844 
4342.3 
9.7321 
2.3965 
1.001
0.1 
1200 
0.18058 
4463.0 
9.8348 
2.4302 
1.001
1 
273.16 
1000.3 
1.02 
0.0000 
4.2150 
87.93
1 
300 
996.96 
113.48 
0.3928 
4.1781 
77.78
1 
325 
987.58 
217.93 
0.7272 
4.1798 
69.36
1 
350 
974.13 
322.56 
1.0374 
4.1925 
61.82
1 
375 
957.43 
427.64 
1.3274 
4.2158 
55.09
1 
400 
937.87 
533.47 
1.6005 
4.2535 
49.06
1 
450 
890.39 
749.20 
2.1086 
4.3924 
38.81
1 
453.03 
887.13 
762.51 
2.1381 
4.4045 
38.23
1 
453.03 
5.1450 
2777.1 
6.5850 
2.7114 
1.042
1 
500 
4.5323 
2891.2 
6.8250 
2.2795 
1.034
PROPERTIES OF WATER AND STEAM AS A FUNCTION OF
TEMPERATURE AND PRESSURE
This table gives properties of compressed water and superheated steam at selected pressures and temperatures. The
properties included are density ρ, enthalpy H, entropy S, heat capacity at constant pressure Cp, and static dielectric
constant (relative permittivity). The table was generated from the formulation approved by the International Association
for the Properties of Water and Steam for general and scientific use. The reference state for this table is the liquid at the
triple point, at which the internal energy and entropy are taken as zero. A duplicate entry in the temperature column
indicates a phase transition (liquid-vapor) at that temperature; property values are then given for both phases. In the 100
MPa section of the table, an entry is given at the critical temperature, 647.10 K. Temperatures refer to the ITS-90 scale,
on which the normal boiling point of water is 373.12 K (99.97°C).
REFERENCES
1. Release on the IAPWS Formulation 1995 for the Thermodynamic Properties of Ordinary Water Substance for
General and Scientific Use, September 1996; available from Executive Secretary of IAPWS, Electric Power
Research Institute, 3412 Hillview Ave., Palo Alto, CA 94304-1395.
2. NIST Chemistry WebBook, NIST Standard Reference Database Number 69, Mallard, W. G., and Linstrom, P. J.,
Eds., March 1998, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, 20899 (http://
webbook.nist.gov).
3. Pruss, A. and Wagner, W., to be published.
4. Fernandez, D. P., Goodwin, A. R. H., Lemmon, E. W., Levelt Sengers, J. M. H., and Williams, R. C., J. Phys. Chem.
Ref. Data, 26, 1125, 1997. [Dielectric constant]
p/MPa 
T/K 
ρ/kg m-3
H/J g-1
S/J g-1K-1
Cp/J g-1K-1
Diel. const.


--- PAGE 1002 ---
6-15
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF WATER AS A
FUNCTION OF TEMPERATURE AND PRESSURE
The following table summarizes the relative permittivity (static dielectric constant) of liquid water and steam over a wide range of temperature and
pressure. Values are given from slightly above the freezing point to 1000 K and at pressures from normal atmospheric to 1000 MPa (about 10000 atm).
The values are generated from an equation that correlates the best experimental measurements from a large number of sources. The correlating equation
and full details of the formulation may be found in Reference 1.
Temperatures are given on the ITS-90 scale. Liquid–vapor boundaries are indicated by horizontal lines.
REFERENCE
Fernandez, D. P., Goodwin, A. R. H., Lemmon, E. W., Levelt Sengers, J. M. H., and Williams, R. C., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 26, 1125, 1997.
Pressure in MPa
T/K
0.1
1
2
5
10
20
50
100
200
500
1000
275
87.16
87.20
87.24
87.36
87.57
87.97
89.16
91 05
94.55
103.7
280
85.19
85.23
85.27
85.39
85.59
85.98
87.14
88.98
92.38
101.3
285
83.27
83.30
83.34
83.46
83.65
84.04
85.17
86.96
90.27
98.91
290
81.39
81.42
81.46
81.57
81.76
82.14
83.24
84.99
88.22
96.64
295
79.55
79.58
79.62
79 73
79.92
80.29
81.37
83.08
86.24
94.44
300
77.75
77.78
77.82
77.93
78.11
78.48
79.54
81.22
84.31
92.31
305
75.99
76.02
76.06
76.17
76.35
76.71
77.75
79.40
82.43
90.25
101.3
310
74.27
74.30
74.33
74.44
74.62
74.98
76.01
77.63
80.61
88.26
99.06
315
72.58
72.61
72.65
72.76
72.93
73.28
74.30
75.90
78.84
86.34
96.87
320
70.93
70.97
71.00
71.11
71.28
71.63
72.64
74.22
77.11
84.48
94.76
340
64.70
64.73
64.77
64.87
65.04
65.38
66.36
67.89
70.65
77.58
87.07
360
59.00
59.03
59 07
59.17
59.34
59.68
60.65
62.15
64.83
71.45
80.36
380
1.006
53.83
53.86
53.97
54.14
54.48
55.45
56.94
59.57
65.95
74.43
400
1.005
49.06
49.10
49.21
49.39
49.73
50.71
52.20
54.80
61.00
69.12
420
1.005
44.70
44.74
44.85
45.04
45.39
46.39
47.90
50.48
56.53
64.35
440
1.004
40.70
40.74
40 85
41.05
41.42
42.45
43.98
46.55
52.48
60.03
460
1.004
1.041
37.04
37.17
37.37
37.76
38.84
40.40
42.99
48.81
56.11
480
1.004
1.038
33.61
33.75
33.97
34.39
35.53
37.14
39.75
45.47
52.55
500
1.003
1.034
1.074
30.55
30.79
31.25
32.47
34.15
36.79
42.44
49.30
550
1.003
1.028
1.059
1.177
23.53
24.18
25.73
27.67
30.46
35.99
42.38
600
1.002
1.024
1.049
1.137
1.365
17.50
19.90
22.29
25.34
30.82
36.82
650
1.002
1.020
1.041
1.112
1.267
2.066
14.50
17.72
21.12
26.62
32.31
700
1.002
1.017
1.036
1.095
1.214
1.603
8.963
13.75
17.60
23.17
28.60
750
1.002
1.015
1.031
1.082
1.179
1.452
4.424
10.34
14.65
20.30
25.51
800
1.001
1.013
1.027
1.071
1.154
1.365
2.844
7.562
12.17
17.88
22.91
850
1.001
1.012
1.024
1.063
1.134
1.307
2.269
5.571
10.10
15.83
20.70
900
1.001
1.011
1.022
1.056
1.118
1.265
1.975
4.284
8.416
14.08
18.80
950
1.001
1.010
1.020
1.050
1.105
1.232
1.793
3.477
7.066
12.57
17.15
1000
1.001
1.009
1.018
1.046
1.095
1.206
1.668
2.956
6.003
11.27
15.72
1050
1.001
1.008
1.016
1.041
1.086
1.184
1.576
2.601
5.172
10.14
14.45
1100
1.001
1.007
1.015
1.038
1.078
1.167
1.505
2.347
4.523
9.160
13.34
1150
1.001
1.007
1.014
1.035
1.072
1.151
1.449
2.158
4.012
8.309
12.35
1200
1.001
1.006
1.013
1.032
1.066
1.139
1.403
2.011
3.606
7.569
11.47


--- PAGE 1003 ---
TeamLRN
6-13
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF WATER AT VARIOUS FREQUENCIES
The permittivity of liquid water in the radiofrequency and microwave regions can be represented by the Debye equation (References 1 and 2):
where ε = ε′ + i ε′′ is the (complex) relative permittivity (i.e., the absolute permittivity divided by the permittivity of free space ε0 = 8.854⋅10-12 F
m-1 ). Here εs is the static permittivity (see Reference 3 and the table “Properties of Water in the Range 0—100°C” in this Section); ε∞ is a parameter
describing the permittivity in the high frequency limit; τ is the relaxation time for molecular orientation; and ω = 2πf is the angular frequency. The
values in this table have been calculated from parameters given in Reference 2:
0°C
25°C
50°C
ε∞
5.7
5.2
4.0
τ/ps
17.67
8.27
4.75
Other useful quantities that can be calculated from the values in the table are the loss tangent:
and the absorption coefficient α which describes the power attentuation per unit length (P = P0 e-αl):
and c is the speed of light. The last equation is valid when ε′′/ε′ << 1.
REFERENCES
1. Fernendez, D.P., Mulev, Y., Goodwin, A.R.H., and Levelt Sengers, J.M.H., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 24, 33, 1995.
2. Kaatze, U., J. Chem. Eng. Data, 34, 371, 1989.
3. Archer, D.G., and Wang, P., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 12, 817, 1983.
0°C
25°C
50°C
Frequency
ε′
ε′′
ε′
ε′′
ε′
ε′′
0
87.90
0.00
78.36
0.00
69.88
0.00
1 kHz
87.90
0.00
78.36
0.00
69.88
0.00
1 MHz
87.90
0.01
78.36
0.00
69.88
0.00
10 MHz
87.90
0.09
78.36
0.04
69.88
0.02
100 MHz
87.89
0.91
78.36
0.38
69.88
0.20
200 MHz
87.86
1.82
78.35
0.76
69.88
0.39
500 MHz
87.65
4.55
78.31
1.90
69.87
0.98
1 GHz
86.90
9.01
78.16
3.79
69.82
1.96
2 GHz
84.04
17.39
77.58
7.52
69.65
3.92
3 GHz
79.69
24.64
76.62
11.13
69.36
5.85
4 GHz
74.36
30.49
75.33
14.58
68.95
7.75
5 GHz
68.54
34.88
73.73
17.81
68.45
9.62
10 GHz
42.52
40.88
62.81
29.93
64.49
18.05
20 GHz
19.56
30.78
40.37
36.55
52.57
28.99
30 GHz
12.50
22.64
26.53
33.25
40.57
32.74
40 GHz
9.67
17.62
18.95
28.58
31.17
32.43
50 GHz
8.28
14.34
14.64
24.53
24.42
30.47
′ =
+
−
+
′′ =
−
(
)
+
∞
∞
∞
ε
ε
ε
ε
ω τ
ε
ε
ε
ωτ
ω τ
s
s
1
1
2
2
2
2
tan
/
δ
ε
ε
=
′′
′
α
π ε
ε
=
′′
′
f
c


--- PAGE 1004 ---
6-14
THERMOPHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS
These tables give thermodynamic and transport properties of some important fluids, as generated from the equations of state presented in the
references below. The properties tabulated are density (ρ), energy (E), enthalpy (H), entropy (S), isochoric heat capacity (Cv), isobaric heat capacity
(Cp), speed of sound (vs), viscosity (η), thermal conductivity (λ), and dielectric constant (D). All extensive properties are given on a molar basis. Not
all properties are included for every substance. The references should be consulted for information on the uncertainties and the reference states for
E, H, and S.
Values are given as a function of temperature for several isobars. The phase can be determined by noting the sharp decrease in density between
two successive temperature entries; all lines above this point refer to the liquid phase, and all lines below refer to the gas phase. If there is no sharp
discontinuity in density, all data in the table refer to the supercritical region (i.e., the isobar is above the critical pressure).
REFERENCES
1. Younglove, B.A., Thermophysical Properties of Fluids. Part I, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 11, Suppl. 1, 1982.
2. Younglove, B.A., and Ely, J.F., Thermophysical Properties of Fluids. Part II, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 16, 577, 1987.
3. McCarty, R.D., Thermodynamic Properties of Helium, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 2, 923, 1973.
Nitrogen (N2)
T
ρ
E
H
S
Cv
Cp
η
λ
D
K
mol/L
J/mol
J/mol
J/mol K
J/mol K
J/mol K
µPa s
mW/m K
P = 0.1 MPa (1 bar)
70
30.017
–3828
–3824
73.8
28.5
57.2
203.9
143.5
1.45269
77.25
28.881
–3411
–3407
79.5
27.8
57.8
152.2
133.8
1.43386
77.25
0.163
1546
2161
151.6
21.6
31.4
5.3
7.6
1.00215
100
0.123
2041
2856
159.5
21.1
30.0
6.8
9.6
1.00162
200
0.060
4140
5800
179.9
20.8
29.2
12.9
18.4
1.00079
300
0.040
6223
8717
191.8
20.8
29.2
18.0
25.8
1.00053
400
0.030
8308
11635
200.2
20.9
29.2
22.2
32.3
1.00040
500
0.024
10414
14573
206.7
21.2
29.6
26.1
38.5
1.00032
600
0.020
12563
17554
212.2
21.8
30.1
29.5
44.5
1.00026
700
0.017
14770
20593
216.8
22.4
30.7
32.8
50.5
1.00023
800
0.015
17044
23698
221.0
23.1
31.4
35.8
56.3
1.00020
900
0.013
19383
26869
224.7
23.7
32.0
38.7
62.0
1.00017
1000
0.012
21786
30103
228.1
24.3
32.6
41.5
67.7
1.00016
1500
0.008
34530
47004
241.8
26.4
34.7
54.0
93.3
1.00010
P = 1 MPa
70
30.070
–3838
–3805
73.6
28.9
56.9
205.9
144.1
1.45355
80
28.504
–3267
–3232
81.3
27.8
57.7
139.5
130.7
1.42760
90
26.721
–2685
–2648
88.2
26.7
59.4
100.1
115.3
1.39824
100
24.634
–2073
–2032
94.6
26.2
64.4
73.1
98.5
1.36417
103.75
23.727
–1828
–1786
97.1
26.2
67.8
64.8
91.8
1.34947
103.75
1.472
1788
2467
138.1
24.1
45.0
7.6
12.5
1.01954
200
0.614
4048
5675
160.3
21.0
30.4
13.2
19.3
1.00812
300
0.402
6171
8661
172.5
20.9
29.6
18.1
26.3
1.00529
400
0.300
8273
11609
180.9
20.9
29.5
22.4
32.7
1.00395
500
0.240
10389
14563
187.5
21.3
29.7
26.1
38.8
1.00315
600
0.200
12544
17554
193.0
21.8
30.2
29.6
44.8
1.00262
700
0.171
14756
20600
197.7
22.4
30.8
32.8
50.7
1.00224
800
0.150
17032
23709
201.8
23.1
31.4
35.9
56.5
1.00196
900
0.133
19374
26884
205.6
23.7
32.1
38.8
62.2
1.00174
1000
0.120
21778
30121
209.0
24.3
32.7
41.5
67.8
1.00157
1500
0.080
34527
47029
222.7
26.4
34.8
54.0
93.4
1.00104
P = 10 MPa
65.32
31.120
–4176
–3855
68.6
31.8
53.8
275.7
153.8
1.47067
100
26.201
–2328
–1946
92.0
27.4
56.3
90.2
112.3
1.38942
200
7.117
3037
4442
136.4
22.7
45.5
17.6
30.4
1.09698
300
3.989
5667
8174
151.7
21.4
33.4
20.1
31.9
1.05347
400
2.898
7941
11392
161.0
21.3
31.3
23.7
36.7
1.03860
500
2.302
10148
14492
167.9
21.5
30.8
27.1
42.0
1.03055


--- PAGE 1036 ---
6-49
CRITICAL CONSTANTS
The parameters of the liquid–gas critical point are important constants in determining the behavior of fluids. This table lists the critical temperature,
pressure, and molar volume, as well as the normal boiling point, for approximately 850 inorganic and organic substances. The properties and their units
are:
Tb: Normal boiling point in kelvins at a pressure of 101.325 kPa (1 atmosphere); an “s” following the value indicates a sublimation point
(temperature at which the solid is in equilibrium with the gas at a pressure of 101.325 kPa)
Tc: Critical temperature in kelvins
Pc: Critical pressure in megapascals
Vc: Critical molar volume in cm3/mol
The number of digits given for Tb, Tc, and Pc indicates the estimated accuracy of these quantities; however, values of Tc greater than 750 K may be
in error by 10 K or more. Although most Vc values are given to three figures, they cannot be assumed accurate to better than a few percent. All values
are experimentally determined except for a few values, indicated by an asterisk*, which are based on extrapolations. Methods of measurement are
described and critiqued in Reference 1.
Many of the critical constants in this table are taken from reviews produced by the IUPAC Commission on Thermodynamics (References 1– 8).
Compounds are listed by molecular formula in modified Hill order, with compounds not containing carbon preceding those that do contain carbon.
The assistance of Douglas Ambrose is gratefully acknowledged.
REFERENCES
1. Ambrose, D., and Young, C. L., J. Chem. Eng. Data 40, 345, 1995. [IUPAC Part 1]
2. Ambrose, D., and Tsonopoulos, C., J. Chem. Eng. Data 40, 531, 1995. [IUPAC Part 2]
3. Tsonopoulos, C., and Ambrose, D., J. Chem. Eng. Data, 40, 547, 1995. [IUPAC Part 3]
4. Gude, M., and Teja, A. S., J. Chem. Eng. Data, 40, 1025, 1995. [IUPAC Part 4]
5. Daubert, T. E., J. Chem. Eng. Data, 41, 365, 1996. [IUPAC Part 5]
6. Tsonopoulos, C., and Ambrose, D., J. Chem. Eng. Data, 41, 645, 1996. [IUPAC Part 6]
7. Kudcharker, A. P., Ambrose, D., and Tsonopoulos, C., J. Chem. Eng. Data, 46, 457, 2001. [IUPAC Part 7]
8. Tsonopoulos, C., and Ambrose, D., J. Chem. Eng. Data 46, 480, 2001. [IUPAC Part 8]
9. Ambrose, D., “Vapor-Liquid Constants of Fluids”, in Stevenson, R. M., and Malanowski, S., Handbook of the Thermodynamics of Organic
Compounds, Elsevier, New York, 1987.
10. Das, A., Frenkel, M., Gadalla, N. A. M., Kudchadker, S., Marsh, K. N., Rodgers, A. S., and Wilhoit, R. C., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 22, 659,
1993.
11. Wilson, L. C., Wilson, H. L., Wilding, W. V., and Wilson, G. M., J. Chem. Eng. Data 41, 1252, 1996.
12. Daubert, T. E., Danner, R. P., Sibul, H. M., and Stebbins, C. C., Physical and Thermodynamic Properties of Pure Compounds: Data
Compilation, extant 2002 (core with supplements), Taylor & Francis, Bristol, PA.
13. Morton, D. W., Lui, M. P. W., Tran, C. A., and Young, C. L., J. Chem. Eng. Data 45, 437, 2000.
14. VonNiederhausern, D. M., Wilson, L. C., Giles, N. F., and Wilson, G. M., J. Chem. Eng. Data, 45, 154, 2000.
15. VonNiederhausern, D. M., Wilson, G. M., and Giles, N. F., J. Chem. Eng. Data, 45, 157, 2000.
16. Nikitin, E. D., Popov, A. P., Bogatishcheva, N. S., and Yatluk, Y. G., J. Chem. Eng. Data 47, 1012, 2002.
17. Wilson, G. M., VonNiederhausern, D. M., and Giles, N. F., J. Chem. Eng. Data 47, 761, 2002.
18. Wang, B. H., Adcock, J. L., Mathur, S. B., and Van Hook, W. A., J. Chem. Thermodynamics 23, 699, 1991.
19. Chae, H. B., Schmidt, J. W., and Moldover, M. R., J. Phys. Chem. 94, 8840, 1990.
20. Dillon, I. G., Nelson, P. A., and Swanson, B. S., J. Chem. Phys. 44, 4229, 1966.
21. Physical Constants of Hydrocarbon and Non-Hydrocarbon Compounds, ASTM Data Series DS 4B, ASTM, Philadelphia, 1988.
22. Nowak, P., Tielkes, T., Kleinraum, R., and Wagner, W., J. Chem. Thermodynamics 29, 885, 1997.
23. Steele, W. V., Chirico, R. D., Nguyen, A., and Knipmeyer, S. E., J. Chem. Thermodynamics 27, 311, 1995
24. Duan, Y. Y., Shi, L., Zhu, M. S., and Han, L. Z., J. Chem. Eng. Data 44, 501, 1999.
25. Weber, L. A., and Defibaugh, D. R., J. Chem. Eng. Data 41, 382, 1996.
26. Duarte-Garza, H. A., Hwang, C. A., Kellerman, S. A., Miller, R. C., Hall, K. R., and Holste, J. C., J. Chem. Eng. Data 42, 497, 1997.
27. Weber, L. A., and Defibaugh, D. R., J. Chem. Eng. Data 41, 1477, 1996.
28. Fujiwara, K., Nakamura, S., and Noguchi, M., J. Chem. Eng. Data 43, 55, 1998.
29. Widiatmo, J. V., Morimoto, Y., and Watanabe, K., J. Chem. Eng. Data 47, 1246, 2002.
30. Duarte-Garza, H. A., Stouffer, C. E., Hall, K. R., Holste, J. C., Marsh, K. N., and Gammon, B. E., J. Chem. Eng. Data 42, 745, 1997.
31. Nikitin, E. D., Pavlov, P. A., Popov, A. P., and Nikitina, H. E., J. Chem. Thermodynamics 27, 945, 1995.
32. Sako, T., Sato, M., Nakazawa, N., Oowa, M., Yasumoto, M., Ito, H., and Yamashita, S., J. Chem. Eng. Data 41, 802, 1996.
33. Zhang, H-L, Sato, H., and Watanabe, K., J. Chem. Eng. Data 40, 1281, 1995.
34. Sifner, O., and Klomfar, J., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 23, 63, 1994.
35. Younglove, B. A., and McLinden, M. O., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 23, 731, 1994.
36. Tillner-Roth, R., and Baehr, H. D., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 23, 657, 1994.
37. Xiang, H. W., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 30, 1161, 2001.
38. Goodwin, A. H. R., Defibaugh, D. R., and Weber, L. A., J. Chem. Eng. Data 43, 846, 1998.


--- PAGE 1055 ---
TeamLRN
VAPOR PRESSURE
This table gives vapor pressure data for about 1800 inorganic and organic substances. In order to accommodate elements and compounds ranging
from refractory to highly volatile in a single table, the temperature at which the vapor pressure reaches specified pressure values is listed. The pressure
values run in decade steps from 1 Pa (about 7.5 µm Hg) to 100 kPa (about 750 mm Hg). All temperatures are given in °C.
The data used in preparing the table came from a large number of sources; the main references used for each substance are indicated in the last
column. Since the data were refit in most cases, values appearing in this table may not be identical with values in the source cited. The temperature
entry in the 100 kPa column is close to, but not identical with, the normal boiling point (which is defined as the temperature at which the vapor pressure
reaches 101.325 kPa). Although some temperatures are quoted to 0.1°C, uncertainties of several degrees should generally be assumed. Values followed
by an “e” were obtained by extrapolating (usually with an Antoine equation) beyond the region for which experimental measurements were available
and are thus subject to even greater uncertainty.
Compounds are listed by molecular formula following the Hill convention. Substances not containing carbon are listed first, followed by those
that contain carbon. To locate an organic compound by name or CAS Registry Number when the molecular formula is not known, use the table Physical
Constants of Organic Compounds in Section 3 and its indexes to determine the molecular formula. The indexes to Physical Constants of Inorganic
Compounds in Section 4 can be used in a similar way.
More extensive and detailed vapor pressure data on selected important substances appear in other tables in this section of the Handbook. These
substances are flagged by a symbol following the name as follows:
*
See Vapor Pressure of Fluids below 300 K
**
See IUPAC Recommended Data for Vapor Pressure Calibration
***
See Vapor Pressure of Ice and Vapor Pressure of Water from 0 to 370°C
The following notations appear after individual temperature entries:
s — Indicates the substance is a solid at this temperature.
e — Indicates an extrapolation beyond the region where experimental measurements exist.
i — Indicates the value was calculated from ideal gas thermodynamic functions, such as those in the JANAF Thermochemical Tables (see
Reference 8).
REFERENCES
1. Lide, D.R., and Kehiaian, H.V., CRC Handbook of Thermophysical and Thermochemical Data, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1994.
2. Stull, D., in American Institute of Physics Handbook, Third Edition, Gray, D.E., Ed., McGraw Hill, New York, 1972.
3. Hultgren, R., Desai, P.D., Hawkins, D.T., Gleiser, M., Kelley, K.K., and Wagman, D.D., Selected Values of Thermodynamic Properties of the
Elements, American Society for Metals, Metals Park, OH, 1973.
4. Stull, D., Ind. Eng. Chem., 39, 517, 1947.
5. TRCVP, Vapor Pressure Database, Version 2.2P, Thermodynamic Research Center, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX.
6. TRC Thermodynamic Tables, Thermodynamic Research Center, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX.
7. Ohe, S., Computer Aided Data Book of Vapor Pressure, Data Book Publishing Co., Tokyo, 1976.
8. Chase, M.W., Davies, C.A., Downey, J.R., Frurip, D.J., McDonald, R.A., and Syverud, A.N., JANAF Thermochemical Tables, Third Edition,
J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, Vol. 14, Suppl. 1, 1985.
9. Barin, I., Thermochemical Data of Pure Substances, VCH Publishers, New York, 1993.
10. Jacobsen, R.T., et. al, International Thermodynamic Tables of the Fluid State, No. 10. Ethylene, Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford,
1988.
11. Wakeham, W.A., International Thermodynamic Tables of the Fluid State, No. 12. Methanol, Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford, 1993.
12. Janz, G.J., Molten Salts Handbook, Academic Press, New York, 1967.
13. Ohse, R.W. Handbook of Thermodynamic and Transport Properties of Alkali Metals, Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford, 1994.
14. Gschneidner, K.A., in CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 77th Edition, p. 4-112, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1996.
15. Leider, H.R., Krikorian, O.H., and Young, D.A., Carbon, 11, 555, 1973.
16. Ruzicka, K., and Majer, V., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 23, 1, 1994.
17. Tillner-Roth, R., and Baehr, H.D., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 23, 657, 1994.
18. Younglove, B.A., and McLinden, M.O., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 23, 731, 1994.
19. Outcalt, S.L., and McLinden, M.O., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 25, 605, 1996.
20. Weber, L.A., and Defibaugh, D.R., J. Chem. Eng. Data, 41, 382, 1996.
21. Rodrigues, M.F., and Bernardo-Gil, M.G., J. Chem. Eng. Data, 41, 581, 1996.
22. Piacente, V., Gigli, G., Scardala, P., and Giustini, A., J. Phys. Chem., 100, 9815, 1996.
23. Barton, J.L., and Bloom, H., J. Phys. Chem., 60, 1413, 1956.
24. Sense, K.A., Alexander, C.A., Bowman, R.E., and Filbert, R.B., J. Phys. Chem., 61, 337, 1957.
25. Ewing, C.T., and Stern, K.H., J. Phys. Chem. 78, 1998, 1974.
26. Cady, G.H., and Hargreaves, G.B., J. Chem. Soc., 1961, 1563; 1961, 1568.
27. Skudlarski, K., Dudek, J., and Kapala, J., J. Chem. Thermodynamics, 19, 857, 1987.
28. Wagner, W., and de Reuck, K.M., International Thermodynamic Tables of the Fluid State, No. 9. Oxygen, Blackwell Scientific Publications,
Oxford, 1987.
6-66


--- PAGE 1112 ---
6-125
ENTHALPY OF FUSION
This table lists the molar enthalpy (heat) of fusion, ∆
fusH, of over 800 inorganic and organic compounds. All values refer to the enthalpy
change at equilibrium between the liquid phase and the most stable solid phase at the transition temperature. Most values of ∆
fusH  are given at
the normal melting point tm. However, a “t” following the entry in the melting point column indicate a triple-point temperature, where the solid,
liquid, and gas phases are in equilibrium. Substances are listed by molecular formula in the Hill order, with substances containing carbon (except
graphite) following those that do not contain carbon.
All temperatures are given on the ITS-90 scale.
A * following an entry indicates that the value includes the enthalpy of transition between crystalline phases whose transformation occurs
within 1˚C of the melting point.
REFERENCES
1.
Chase, M. W., Davies, C. A., Downey, J. R., Frurip, D. J., McDonald, R. A., and Syverud, A. N., JANAF Thermochemical Tables, Third
Edition, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, Vol. 14, Suppl. 1, 1985.
2.
Gurvich, L. V., Veyts, I. V., and Alcock, C. B., Thermodynamic Properties of Individual Substances, Fourth Edition; Vol. 2, Hemi-
sphere Publishing Corp., New York, 1991; Vol. 3, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1994.
3.
Dinsdale, A. T., CALPHAD, 15, 317, 1991
4.
Landolt-Börnstein, Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in Science and Technology, New Series, IV/8A, Enthalpies of Fusion
and Transition of Organic Compounds, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1995.
5.
Landolt-Börnstein, Numerical Values and Functions for Physics, Chemistry, Astronomy, Geophysics, and Technology, Sixth Edition,
Vol. 2, Part 4, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1961.
6.
Janz, G. J., et al., Physical Properties Data Compilations  Relevant to Energy Storage. II. Molten Salts, Nat. Stand. Ref. Data Sys.- Nat.
Bur. Standards (U.S.), No. 61, Part 2, 1979.
7.
TRC Thermodynamic Tables, Thermodynamic Research Center, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX.
Molecular
formula
Name
tm/˚C
∆
fusH/kJ mol-1
Ag
Silver
 961.78
 11.28
AgBr
Silver(I) bromide
 432
  9.12
AgCl
Silver(I) chloride
 455
 13.2
AgI
Silver(I) iodide
 558
  9.41
AgNO3
Silver(I) nitrate
 212
 11.5
Ag2S
Silver(I) sulfide
 825
 14.1
Al
Aluminum
 660.32
 10.789
AlBr3
Aluminum bromide
  97.5
 11.25
AlCl3
Aluminum chloride
 192.6
 35.4
AlF3
Aluminum fluoride
2250 t
 98
AlI3
Aluminum iodide
 188.28
 15.9
Al2O3
Aluminum oxide
2053
111.4
Al2S3
Aluminum sulfide
1100
 55
Am
Americium
1176
 14.39
Ar
Argon
-189.36 t
  1.18
As
Arsenic (gray)
 817 t
 24.44
AsBr3
Arsenic(III) bromide
  31.1
 11.7
AsCl3
Arsenic(III) chloride
 -16
 10.1
AsF3
Arsenic(III) fluoride
  -5.9
 10.4
Au
Gold
1064.18
 12.72
B
Boron
2075
 50.2
BCl3
Boron trichloride
-107
  2.10
BF3
Boron trifluoride
-126.8
  4.20
BHO2
Metaboric acid (γ  form)
 236
 14.3
BH3O3
Boric acid (orthoboric acid)
 170.9
 22.3
BN
Boron nitride
2966
 81


--- PAGE 1127 ---
TeamLRN
© 2000 CRC Press LLC
PRESSURE AND TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF LIQUID DENSITY
This table gives data on the variation of the density of some common liquids with pressure and temperature. The pressure dependence is described
to first order by the isothermal compressibility coefficient κ defined as
κ = -(1/V) (∂V/∂P)T
where V is the volume, and the temperature dependence by the cubic expansion coefficient α,
α = (1/V) (∂V/∂T)P
Substances are listed by molecular formula in the Hill order. More precise data on the variation of density with temperature over a wide temperature
range can be found in Reference 1.
REFERENCES
1. Lide, D. R., and Kehiaian, H. V., CRC Handbook of Thermophysical and Thermochemical Data, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1994.
2. Le Neindre, B., Effets des Hautes et Très Hautes Pressions, in Techniques de l’Ingénieur, Paris, 1991.
3. Landolt-Börnstein, Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in Science and Technology, New Series, IV/4, High-pressure Properties of
Matter, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1980.
4. Riddick, J.A., Bunger, W.B., and Sakano, T.K., Organic Solvents, Fourth Edition, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1986.
5. Isaacs, N. S., Liquid Phase High Pressure Chemistry, John Wiley, New York, 1981.
Molecular
Isothermal Compressibility
Cubic Thermal Expansion
formula
Name
t/°C
κ × 104/MPa–1
t/°C
α × 103/°C–1
Cl3P
Phosphorus trichloride
20
9.45
20
1.9
H2O
Water
20
4.591
20
0.206
25
4.524
25
0.256
30
4.475
30
0.302
Hg
Mercury
20
0.401
20
1.811
CCl4
Tetrachloromethane
20
10.50
20
1.14
40
12.20
40
1.21
70
15.6
70
1.33
CHBr3
Tribromomethane
50
8.76
25
0.91
CHCl3
Trichloromethane
20
9.96
20
1.21
50
12.9
50
1.33
CH2Br2
Dibromomethane
27
6.85
CH2Cl2
Dichloromethane
25
10.3
25
1.39
CH3I
Iodomethane
27
10.3
25
1.26
CH4O
Methanol
20
12.14
20
1.49
40
13.83
40
1.59
CS2
Carbon disulfide
20
9.38
20
1.12
40
10.6
35
1.16
C2Cl4
Tetrachloroethylene
25
7.56
25
1.02
C2HCl3
Trichloroethylene
25
8.57
25
1.17
C2H2Cl2
trans-1,2-Dichloroethylene
25
11.2
25
1.36
C2H4Cl2
1,1-Dichloroethane
20
7.97
25
0.93
C2H4Cl2
1,2-Dichloroethane
30
8.46
20
1.14
C2H4O2
Acetic acid
20
9.08
20
1.08
80
13.7
80
1.38
C2H5Br
Bromoethane
20
11.53
20
1.31
C2H5I
Iodoethane
20
9.82
25
1.17
C2H6O
Ethanol
20
11.19
20
1.40
70
15.93
70
1.67
C2H6O2
Ethylene glycol
20
3.64
20
0.626
C3H6O
Acetone
20
12.62
20
1.46
40
15.6
40
1.57
C3H7Br
1-Bromopropane
0
10.22
25
1.2
C3H7Cl
1-Chloropropane
0
12.09
20
1.4
C3H7I
1-Iodopropane
0
10.22
25
1.09
C3H8O
1-Propanol
0
8.43
0
1.22
C3H8O
2-Propanol
40
13.32
40
1.55
C3H8O2
1,2-Propanediol
0
4.45
20
0.695


--- PAGE 1129 ---
TeamLRN
6-129
PROPERTIES OF CRYOGENIC FLUIDS
This table gives physical and thermodynamic properties of eight cryogenic fluids. The properties are:
M
Molar mass in grams per mole
Tt
Triple point temperature in kelvins
Pt
Triple point pressure in kilopascals
ρt (1)
Liquid density at the triple point in grams per milliliter
∆fusH @ Tt
Enthalpy of fusion at the triple point in joules per gram
Tb
Normal boiling point in kelvins at a pressure of 101325 pascals (760 mmHg)
∆vapH @ Tb
Enthalpy of vaporization at the normal boiling point in joules per gram
ρ (l) @ Tb
Liquid density at the normal boiling point in grams per milliliter
3. Sytchev, V. V., et al., Thermodynamic Properties of Air, Hemisphere Publishing, New York, 1987.
4. Jacobsen, R. T., Stewart, R. B., and Jahangiri, M., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 15, 735, 1986. [Nitrogen]
5. Stewart, R. B., Jacobsen, R. T., and Wagner, W., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 20, 917, 1991. [Oxygen]
6. McCarty, R. D., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 2, 923, 1973. [Helium] Also, Donnelly, R. J., private communication.
7. Stewart, R. B. and Jacobsen, R. T., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 18, 639, 1989. [Argon]
8. Setzmann, U. and Wagner, W., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 20, 1061, 1991. [Methane]
9. Vargaftik, N. B., Thermophysical Properties of Liquids and Gases, 2nd ed., John Wiley, New York, 1975.
ρ (g) @ Tb
Vapor density at the normal boiling point in grams per liter
Cp (l) @ Tb
Liquid heat capacity at constant pressure at the normal boiling point in joules
  per gram kelvin
Cp (g) @ Tb
Vapor heat capacity at constant pressure at the normal boiling point in joules
  per gram kelvin
Tc
Critical temperature in kelvins
Pc
Critical pressure in megapascals
ρc
Critical density in grams per milliliter
In the case of air, the value given for the triple point temperature is the incipient solidification temperature, and the normal boiling point value is the incipient boiling (bubble) point. See Reference 3 for more
details.
REFERENCES
1. Younglove, B. A., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 11, Suppl. 1, 1982.
2. Daubert, T. E., Danner, R. P., Sibul, H. M., and Stebbins, C. C., Physical and Thermodynamic Properties of Pure Compounds: Data Compilation, extant 1994 (core with 4 supplements), Taylor &
Francis, Bristol, PA (also available as database).
Property
Units
Air
N2
O2
H2
He
Ne
Ar
Kr
Xe
CH4
M
g/mol
28.96
28.014
31.999
2.0159
4.0026
20.180
39.948
83.800
131.290
16.043
Tt
K
59.75
63.15
54.3584
13.8
24.5561
83.8058
115.8
161.4
90.694
Pt
kPa
12.463
0.14633
7.042
50
68.95
72.92
81.59
11.696
ρt (l)
g/mL
0.959
0.870
1.306
0.0770
1.251
1.417
2.449
2.978
0.4515
∆fusH @ Tt
J/g
25.3
13.7
59.5
16.8
28.0
16.3
13.8
58.41
Tb
K
78.67
77.35
90.188
20.28
4.2221
27.07
87.293
119.92
165.10
111.668
∆vapH @ Tb
J/g
198.7
198.8
213.1
445
20.7
84.8
161.0
108.4
96.1
510.83
ρ (l) @ Tb
g/mL
0.8754
0.807
1.141
0.0708
0.124901
1.204
1.396
2.418
2.953
0.4224
ρ (g) @ Tb
g/L
3.199
4.622
4.467
1.3390
16.89
9.51
5.79
8.94
1.816
Cp (l) @ Tb
J/g K
1.865
2.042
1.699
9.668
4.545
1.877
1.078
0.533
0.340
3.481
Cp (g) @ Tb
J/g K
1.341
0.980
12.24
9.78
0.570
0.248
0.158
2.218
Tc
K
132.5
126.20
154.581
32.98
5.1953
44.40
150.663
209.40
289.73
190.56
Pc
MPa
3.766
3.390
5.043
1.293
0.227460
2.760
4.860
5.500
5.840
4.592
ρc
g/mL
0.316
0.313
0.436
0.031
0.06964
0.484
0.531
0.919
1.110
0.1627


--- PAGE 1130 ---
PROPERTIES OF LIQUID HELIUM
The following data were obtained by a critical evaluation of all existing experimental measurements on liquid helium, using a fitting procedure
described in the reference. All values refer to liquid helium at saturated vapor pressure; temperatures are on the ITS-90 scale. Several properties
show a singularity at the lambda point (2.1768 K).
p : vapor pressure
σ : surface tension
ρ : density
α : coefficient of linear expansion
Cs : molar heat capacity
η : viscosity
∆vapH : molar enthalpy of vaporization
λ : thermal conductivity
ε : relative permittivity (dielectric constant)
REFERENCE
Donnelly, R. J., and Barenghi, C. F., J. Phys. Chem. Reference Data 27, 1217, 1998.
T/K
p/kPa
ρ/g cm-3
Cs /J mol-1K-1
∆vapH/J mol-1
ε
σ /mΝ m−1
103α/K-1
η/µPa s
λ /W cm-1K-1
0.0
0.1451397
0
59.83
1.057255
0.000
0.5
0.1451377
0.010
70.24
1.057254
0.3530
0.107
1.0
0.01558
0.1451183
0.415
80.33
1.057246
0.3471
0.309
3.873
1.5
0.4715
0.1451646
4.468
89.35
1.057265
0.3322
-2.36
1.346
2.0
3.130
0.1456217
21.28
93.07
1.057449
0.3021
-12.2
1.468
2.5
10.23
0.1448402
9.083
92.50
1.057135
0.2623
39.4
3.259
0.1497
3.0
24.05
0.1412269
9.944
94.11
1.055683
0.2161
61.5
3.517
0.1717
3.5
47.05
0.1360736
12.37
92.84
1.053615
0.1626
88.7
3.509
0.1868
4.0
81.62
0.1289745
15.96
87.00
1.050770
0.1095
129
3.319
0.1965
4.5
130.3
0.1188552
21.8
75.86
1.046725
0.0609
211
5.0
196.0
44.7
47.67
0.0157
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2000 by CRC PRESS LLC 


--- PAGE 1131 ---
TeamLRN
6-144
PROPERTIES OF REFRIGERANTS
This table gives physical properties of compounds that have been used as working fluids in traditional refrigeration systems or are under consideration
as replacements in newer systems. Some are also used as solvents and blowing agents. Many of the compounds listed are believed to be less harmful
to the environment than the traditional halocarbons refrigerants.
Compounds are listed by their ASHRAE standard refrigerant designations (Reference 1), which appear in the first column. These codes are often
prefixed by symbols such as CFC- (for chlorofluorocarbon), HCFC- (for hydrochlorofluorocarbon), or simply R- (for refrigerant). The molecular
formula and CAS Registry Number are also given. The properties tabulated are:
tm normal melting point in ∞C
tb normal boiling point in ∞C (at 101.325 kPa or 760 mmHg)
tc critical temperature in ∞C
TLV Threshold Limit Value, which is the maximum safe concentration in air in the workplace, expressed as the time-weighted average (TWA) in
parts per million by volume over an 8-hr workday and 40-hr workweek. A value followed by C is an absolute ceiling limit. Asphyxiants that
are not otherwise toxic are indicated by “asphyx”.
REFERENCES
1. ASHRAE Standard 34-1997, Number Designation and Safety Classification of Refrigerants.
2. ASHRAE Fundamentals Handbook 2001, Chapter 19. Refrigerants, American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-Conditioning
Engineers, Atlanta, GA, 2001.
3. Platzer, B., Polt, A., and Mauer, G., Thermophysical Properties of Refrigerants, Springer, Berlin, 1990.
4. Sako, T., Sato, M., Nakazawa, N., Oowa, M., Yasumoto, M., Ito, H., and Yamashita, S., J. Chem. Eng. Data 41, 802, 1996.
5. Schmidt, J. W., Carrillo-Nava, E., and Moldover, M. R., Fluid Phase Equilibria, 122, 187, 1996.
6. Salvi-Narkhede, M., Wang, B-H., Adcock, J. L., and Van Hook, W. A., J. Chem. Thermodynamics 24, 1065, 1992.
7. Fialho, P. S., and Nieto de Castro, C. A., Int. J. Thermophys. 21, 385, 2000.
8. Daubert, T. E., Danner, R. P., Sibul, H. M., and Stebbins, C. C., Physical and Thermodynamic Properties of Pure Compounds: Data
Compilation, extant 2002 (core with supplements), Taylor & Francis, Bristol, PA.
Further references and additional data on the critical properties may be found in the table “Critical Constants” in this section.
Molecular
CAS
Code
Name
Formula
Reg. No.
tm/∞C
tb/∞C
tc/∞C
TLV
10
Tetrachloromethane
CCl4
56-23-5
-22.62
76.8
283.4
5
11
Trichlorofluoromethane
CCl3F
75-69-4
-110.44
23.7
197.9
1000C
12
Dichlorodifluoromethane
CCl2F2
75-71-8
-158
-29.8
111.80
1000
12B1
Bromochlorodifluoromethane
CBrClF2
353-59-3
-159.5
-3.7
153.73
12B2
Dibromodifluoromethane
CBr2F2
75-61-6
-110.1
22.76
198.1
100
13
Chlorotrifluoromethane
CClF3
75-72-9
-181
-81.4
29
13B1
Bromotrifluoromethane
CBrF3
75-63-8
-172
-57.8
67.0
1000
14
Tetrafluoromethane
CF4
75-73-0
-183.60
-128.0
-45.5
20
Trichloromethane
CHCl3
67-66-3
-63.41
61.17
263.2
10
21
Dichlorofluoromethane
CHCl2F
75-43-4
-135
8.9
178.43
10
22
Chlorodifluoromethane
CHClF2
75-45-6
-157.42
-40.7
96.3
1000
22B1
Bromodifluoromethane
CHBrF2
1511-62-2
-145
-14.6
138.83
23
Trifluoromethane
CHF3
75-46-7
-155.2
-82.1
25.83
30
Dichloromethane
CH2Cl2
75-09-2
-97.2
40
237
50
31
Chlorofluoromethane
CH2ClF
593-70-4
-135.1
-9.1
154
32
Difluoromethane
CH2F2
75-10-5
-136.8
-51.6
78.41
40
Chloromethane
CH3Cl
74-87-3
-97.7
-24.09
143.10
50
41
Fluoromethane
CH3F
593-53-3
-141.8
-78.4
44.6
50
Methane
CH4
74-82-8
-182.47
-161.48
-82.59
asphyx
110
Hexachloroethane
C2Cl6
67-72-1
186.8
184.7 sp
422
1
111
Pentachlorofluoroethane
C2Cl5F
354-56-3
101.3
138
112
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloro-1,2-difluoroethane
C2Cl4F2
76-12-0
24.8
92.8
278
500
112a
1,1,1,2-Tetrachloro-2,2-difluoroethane
C2Cl4F2
76-11-9
41.0
92.8
500
113
1,1,2-Trichloro-1,2,2-trifluoroethane
C2Cl3F3
76-13-1
-36.22
47.7
214.1
1000
113a
1,1,1-Trichloro-2,2,2-trifluoroethane
C2Cl3F3
354-58-5
14.37
45.5
209.7
114
1,2-Dichloro-1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethane
C2Cl2F4
76-14-2
-92.53
3.5
145.63
1000
114a
1,1-Dichloro-1,2,2,2-tetrafluoroethane
C2Cl2F4
374-07-2
-56.6
3.4
145.4
114B2
1,2-Dibromotetrafluoroethane
C2Br2F4
124-73-2
-110.32
47.35
214.6


--- PAGE 1137 ---
TeamLRN
6-135
SURFACE TENSION OF COMMON LIQUIDS
The surface tension γ of about 200 liquids is tabulated here as a function of temperature. Values of γ are given in units of millinewtons per meter
(mN/m), which is equivalent to dyn/cm in cgs units. The values refer to a nominal pressure of one atmosphere (about 100 kPa) except in cases where
the indicated temperature is above the normal boiling point of the substance; in those cases, the applicable pressure is the saturation vapor pressure
at the temperature in question.
The uncertainty of the values is 0.1 to 0.2 mN/m or less in most cases. Values at temperatures between the points tabulated can be obtained by linear
interpolation to a good approximation.
Substances are listed by molecular formula in the modified Hill order, with substances not containing carbon appearing before those that do contain
carbon. A more extensive compilation of surface tension may be found in the Reference.
REFERENCE
Jasper, J. J., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 1, 841, 1972.
γ in mN/m
Mol. form.
Name
10°C
25°C
50°C
75°C
100°C
Br2
Bromine
43.68
40.95
36.40
Cl2O2S
Sulfuryl chloride
28.78
Cl3OP
Phosphoryl chloride
32.03
28.85
25.66
Cl3P
Phosphorus trichloride
27.98
24.81
Cl4Si
Silicon tetrachloride
19.78
18.29
15.80
H2O
Water
74.23
71.99
67.94
63.57
58.91
H4N2
Hydrazine
66.39
Hg
Mercury
488.55
485.48
480.36
475.23
470.11
CCl4
Tetrachloromethane
26.43
23.37
20.31
17.25
CS2
Carbon disulfide
33.81
31.58
27.87
CHBr3
Tribromomethane
44.87
41.60
38.33
CHCl3
Trichloromethane
26.67
23.44
20.20
CH2Br2
Dibromomethane
39.05
35.33
31.61
CH2Cl2
Dichloromethane
27.20
CH2O2
Formic acid
37.13
34.38
31.64
CH3I
Iodomethane
32.19
30.34
CH3NO
Formamide
57.03
54.92
52.82
50.71
CH3NO2
Nitromethane
39.04
36.53
32.33
CH4O
Methanol
23.23
22.07
20.14
CH5N
Methylamine
19.15
C2HCl5
Pentachloroethane
34.15
31.20
28.26
C2HF3O2
Trifluoroacetic acid
13.53
11.42
C2H2Cl4
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane
35.58
32.41
29.24
26.07
C2H3Cl3
1,1,1-Trichloroethane
25.18
22.07
C2H3Cl3
1,1,2-Trichloroethane
34.02
30.65
27.27
23.89
C2H3N
Acetonitrile
28.66
25.51
C2H4Br2
1,2-Dibromoethane
39.55
36.25
32.95
C2H4Cl2
1,1-Dichloroethane
24.07
C2H4Cl2
1,2-Dichloroethane
31.86
28.29
24.72
C2H4O
Acetaldehyde
22.54
20.50
17.10
C2H4O2
Acetic acid
27.10
24.61
22.13
C2H4O2
Methyl formate
26.72
24.36
20.43
16.50
12.57
C2H5Br
Bromoethane
25.36
23.62
C2H5I
Iodoethane
30.38
28.46
25.24
C2H5NO2
Nitroethane
34.02
32.13
29.00
C2H6O
Ethanol
23.22
21.97
19.89
C2H6OS
Dimethyl sulfoxide
42.92
40.06
C2H6O2
Ethylene glycol
47.99
45.76
43.54
41.31
C2H6S
Dimethyl sulfide
25.27
24.06
C2H6S
Ethanethiol
23.08
C2H6S2
Dimethyl disulfide
33.39
30.04
C2H7N
Dimethylamine
26.34
C2H7N
Ethylamine
19.20


--- PAGE 1142 ---
6-153
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS
Christian Wohlfarth
The permittivity of a substance (often called the dielectric constant) is the ratio of the electric displacement D to the electric field strength E when
an external field is applied to the substance. The quantity tabulated here is the relative permittivity, which is the ratio of the actual permittivity to the
permittivity of a vacuum; it is a dimensionless number.
The table gives the static relative permittivity εr, i.e., the relative permittivity measured in static fields or at low frequencies where no relaxation
effects occur. The fourth column of the table lists the value of εr at the temperature specified in the third column, usually 293.15 or 298.15 K. Otherwise,
the temperature closest to 293.15 K was chosen, or (as it is the case for many of the substances included here) εr is given at the only temperature for
which data are available.
The static permittivity refers to nominal atmospheric pressure as long as the corresponding temperature is below the normal boiling point.
Otherwise, at temperatures above the normal boiling point, the pressure is understood to be the saturated vapor pressure of the substance considered.
For substances where information on the temperature dependence of the permittivity is available, the table gives the coefficients of a simple
polynomial fitting of permittivity to temperature with an equation of the form
εr(T) = a + bT + cT2 + dT3
where T is the absolute temperature in K. Since the parameter d was used in only a few cases where the quadratic fit was not satisfactory, only a, b,
and c are listed as columns in the table, while the d values are given at the end of this introduction. For all other substances, d = 0. The temperature
range of the fit is given in the last column. The coefficients of the fitting equation can be used to calculate dielectric constants within the fitted
temperature range but should not be used for extrapolation outside this range. The user who needs dielectric constant data with more accuracy than
can be provided by this equation is referred to Reference 1, which gives the original data together with their literature source.
Substances are listed by molecular formula in modified Hill  order, with substances not containing carbon preceding those that do contain carbon.
 * Indicates that the isomer was not specified in the original reference.
 ** Indicates a compound for which the cubic term is needed:
Ethanol
d = -0.15512E-05
N-Methylacetamide
d = -0.12998E-04
1,2-Propylene glycol
d = -0.32544E-05
1-Butanol
d = -0.48841E-06
2-Butanol
d = -0.89512E-06
2-Methyl-1-propanol
d = -0.45229E-06
2-Methyl-2-propanol
d = -0.25968E-05
N-Butylacetamide
d = -0.48716E-05
REFERENCES
1. Wohlfarth, Ch., “Static Dielectric Constants of Pure Liquids and Binary Liquid Mixtures”, Landolt-Börnstein, Numerical Data and Functional
Relationships in Science and Technology, New Series, Editor in Chief, O. Madelung, Group IV, Macroscopic and Technical Properties of
Matter, Volume 6, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1991.
2. Marsh, K. N., Ed., Recommended Reference Materials for the Realization of Physicochemical Properties, Blackwell Scientific Publications,
Oxford, 1987.
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K
AlBr3
Aluminum tribromide
373.2
3.38
Ar
Argon
140.00
1.3247
0.12408E+01
0.68755E-02
-0.45344E-04
87-149
AsH3
Arsine
200.9
2.40
0.37674E+01
-0.97454E-02
0.14537E-04
157-201
BBr3
Boron tribromide
273.2
2.58
B2H6
Diborane
180.66
1.8725
0.23848E+01
-0.29501E-02
0.64189E-06
108-181
B5H9
Pentaborane(9)
298.2
21.1
0.40952E+03
-0.24414E+01
0.38225E-02
226-298
BrF3
Bromine trifluoride
298.2
106.8
BrF5
Bromine pentafluoride
297.7
7.91
0.11428E+02
-0.11822E-01
262-298
BrH
Hydrogen bromide
186.8
8.23
BrNO
Nitrosyl bromide
288.4
13.4
Br2
Bromine
297.9
3.1484
0.32701E+01
-0.12535E-03
273-327
Br2OS
Thionyl bromide
293.2
9.06
Br3OV
Vanadyl tribromide
298.2
3.6
0.61112E+01
-0.84211E-02
203-298
Br4Ge
Germanium(IV) bromide
299.9
2.955
0.34450E+01
-0.16083E-02
300-316
Br4Sn
Tin(IV) bromide
303.45
3.169
0.50001E+01
-0.60383E-02
304-316
ClFO3
Perchloryl fluoride
150.2
2.194
0.23808E+01
-0.38629E-03
-0.57143E-05
125-150
ClF3
Chlorine trifluoride
293.2
4.394
0.96716E+01
-0.18000E-01
273-313


--- PAGE 1143 ---
TeamLRN
6-154
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K
ClF5
Chlorine pentafluoride
193.2
4.28
0.78192E+01
-0.20860E-01
0.13132E-04
193-256
ClH
Hydrogen chloride
158.9
14.3
0.47316E+02
-0.28455E+00
0.48650E-03
159-258
ClNO
Nitrosyl chloride
285.2
18.2
Cl2
Chlorine
208.0
2.147
0.29440E+01
-0.44649E-02
0.30388E-05
208-240
Cl2F3P
Phosphorus(V) dichloride trifluoride
228.63
2.8129
0.46501E+01
-0.80358E-02
172-229
Cl2OS
Thionyl chloride
298.2
8.675
Cl2OSe
Selenium oxychloride
293.2
46.2
Cl2O2S
Sulfuryl chloride
293.2
9.1
Cl2S
Sulfur dichloride
298.2
2.915
Cl2S2
Sulfur chloride
288.2
4.79
Cl3F2P
Phosphorus(V) trichloride difluoride
268.0
2.3752
0.28905E+01
-0.19228E-02
215-268
Cl3OP
Phosphorus(V) oxychloride
293.2
14.1
Cl3OV
Vanadyl trichloride
298.2
3.4
Cl3P
Phosphorus(III) chloride
290.2
3.498
0.59098E+01
-0.83322E-02
290-333
Cl3PS
Phosphorus(V) sulfide trichloride
298.2
4.94
Cl4FP
Phosphorus(V) tetrachloride fluoride
272.64
2.6499
0.33503E+01
-0.29651E-02
244-273
Cl4Ge
Germanium(IV) chloride
273.2
2.463
-0.55078E+01
0.64881E-01
-0.13091E-03
246-273
Cl4Pb
Lead(IV) chloride
293.2
2.78
Cl4Si
Tetrachlorosilane
273.2
2.248
0.58041E+01
-0.27129E-01
0.51678E-04
207-273
Cl4Sn
Tin(IV) chloride
273.2
3.014
0.43951E+01
-0.48805E-02
234-273
Cl4Ti
Titanium(IV) chloride
257.4
2.843
0.33668E+01
-0.19675E-02
237-257
Cl4V
Vanadium(IV) chloride
298.2
3.05
Cl5P
Phosphorus(V) chloride
433.2
2.85
Cl5Sb
Antimony(V) chloride
293.0
3.222
0.45413E+01
-0.45078E-02
276-320
FH
Hydrogen fluoride
273.2
83.6
0.50352E+03
-0.19297E+01
0.14372E-02
200-273
F2
Fluorine
53.48
1.4913
0.14144E+01
0.26387E-02
-0.28356E-04
54-144
F5I
Iodine pentafluoride
293.2
37.13
0.95184E+02
-0.19800E+00
273-313
F6S
Sulfur hexafluoride
223.2
1.81
F6Xe
Xenon hexafluoride
328.2
4.10
F7I
Iodine heptafluoride
298.2
1.75
F10S2
Sulfur decafluoride
293.2
2.0202
HI
Hydrogen iodide
220.2
3.87
0.51557E+03
-0.44552E+01
0.96795E-02
220-236
H2
Hydrogen
13.52
1.2792
0.13327E+01
-0.51946E-02
14-19
H2O
Water
293.2
80.100
0.24921E+03
-0.79069E+00
0.72997E-03
273-372
H2O2
Hydrogen peroxide
290.2
74.6
0.48511E+03
-0.23145E+01
0.31020E-02
233-303
H2S
Hydrogen sulfide
283.2
5.93
0.14736E+02
-0.33675E-01
0.96740E-05
212-363
H3N
Ammonia
293.2
16.61
0.66756E+02
-0.24696E+00
0.25913E-03
238-323
H4N2
Hydrazine
298.2
51.7
0.22061E+03
-0.89633E+00
0.11066E-02
278-323
He
Helium
2.055
1.0555
0.10640E+01
-0.35584E-02
2-4
I2
Iodine
391.25
11.08
0.64730E+02
-0.29266E+00
0.39759E-03
391-441
Kr
Krypton
119.80
1.664
Mn2O7
Manganese(VII) oxide
293.2
3.28
0.37655E+01
-0.16463E-02
283-312
NO
Nitric oxide
1.997
N2
Nitrogen
63.15
1.4680
0.12550E+01
0.67949E-02
-0.56704E-04
63-126
N2O3
Nitrogen trioxide
203.2
31.13
0.92287E+02
-0.43306E+00
0.65000E-03
203-243
N2O4
Nitrogen tetroxide
293.2
2.44
0.28212E+01
-0.13000E-02
253-293
Ne
Neon
26.11
1.1907
0.12667E+01
-0.29064E-02
26-29
O2
Oxygen
54.478
1.5684
0.15434E+01
0.14615E-02
-0.21964E-04
55-154
O2S
Sulfur dioxide
298.2
16.3
0.52045E+02
-0.16125E+00
0.11042E-03
213-449
O3
Ozone
90.2
4.75
0.86344E+01
-0.54807E-01
0.12596E-03
90-185
O3S
Sulfur trioxide
291.2
3.11
P
Phosphorus
307.2
4.096
0.79018E+00
0.23911E-01
-0.42826E-04
307-358
S
Sulfur
407.2
3.4991
0.51651E+01
-0.77381E-02
0.89120E-05
407-479
Se
Selenium
510.65
5.44
0.67569E+01
-0.25829E-02
511-575
Xe
Xenon
161.35
1.880
CBrClF2
Bromochlorodifluoromethane
123.2
3.920
0.52442E+01
-0.11000E-01
123-223
CBrCl3
Bromotrichloromethane
293.2
2.405
0.29249E+01
-0.17650E-02
273-333
CBrF3
Bromotrifluoromethane
123.2
3.730
0.54154E+01
-0.13680E-01
123-173
CBr2Cl2
Dibromodichloromethane
298.2
2.542
0.32330E+01
-0.23162E-02
298-333


--- PAGE 1144 ---
6-155
CBr2F2
Dibromodifluoromethane
273.2
2.939
0.67296E+01
-0.22133E-01
0.30213E-04
139-273
CBr3Cl
Tribromochloromethane
333.2
2.601
CBr3F
Tribromofluoromethane
293.2
3.00
0.53203E+01
-0.11061E-01
0.10688E-04
206-323
CBr3NO2
Tribromonitromethane
298.2
9.034
0.16079E+02
-0.23630E-01
298-328
CClF3
Chlorotrifluoromethane
123.2
3.010
0.43677E+01
-0.11020E-01
123-173
CCl2F2
Dichlorodifluoromethane
123.2
3.500
0.46984E+01
-0.97600E-02
123-223
CCl2O
Carbonyl chloride
295.2
4.30
CCl3D
Trichloromethane-d
298.2
4.67
CCl3F
Trichlorofluoromethane
293.2
3.00
0.53203E+01
-0.11061E-01
0.10688E-04
206-323
CCl3NO2
Trichloronitromethane
293.2
7.319
0.14403E+02
-0.24178E-01
276-333
CCl4
Tetrachloromethane
293.2
2.2379
0.28280E+01
-0.20339E-02
0.71795E-07
283-333
CF4
Tetrafluoromethane
126.3
1.685
0.20350E+01
-0.27616E-02
126-142
CHBr3
Tribromomethane
283.2
4.404
0.71707E+01
-0.98000E-02
283-343
CHCl3
Trichloromethane
293.2
4.8069
0.15115E+02
-0.51830E-01
0.56803E-04
218-323
CHF3
Trifluoromethane
294.0
5.2
0.11442E+03
-0.75600E+00
0.13562E-02
130-263
CHN
Hydrogen cyanide
293.2
114.9
0.37331E+04
-0.23180E+02
0.36963E-01
258-299
CH2Br2
Dibromomethane
283.2
7.77
0.18060E+02
-0.36333E-01
283-313
CH2Cl2
Dichloromethane
298.0
8.93
0.40452E+02
-0.17748E+00
0.23942E-03
184-306
CH2F2
Difluoromethane
152.2
53.74
0.19428E+03
-0.12939E+01
0.24280E-02
152-224
CH2I2
Diiodomethane
298.2
5.32
CH2O2
Formic acid
298.2
51.1
0.14040E+03
-0.24673E+00
-0.17151E-03
287-358
CH3Br
Bromomethane
275.7
9.71
0.40580E+02
-0.18418E+00
0.26219E-03
195-276
CH3Cl
Chloromethane
295.2
10.0
0.42775E+02
-0.16175E+00
0.17108E-03
190-392
CH3ClO2S
Methanesulfonyl chloride
293.2
34.0
0.10384E+03
-0.33838E+00
0.34156E-03
293-373
CH3DO
Methan-d1-ol
297.5
31.68
0.20839E+03
-0.10318E+01
0.14740E-02
176-298
CH3F
Fluoromethane
131.0
51.0
0.11338E+03
-0.63979E+00
0.96983E-03
150-299
CH3I
Iodomethane
293.2
6.97
0.24264E+02
-0.93914E-01
0.11926E-03
223-303
CH3NO
Formamide
293.2
111.0
0.26076E+03
-0.61145E+00
0.34296E-03
278-333
CH3NO2
Nitromethane
293.2
37.27
0.11227E+03
-0.35591E+00
0.34206E-03
288-343
CH3NO2
Methyl nitrite
200.0
20.77
0.11071E+03
-0.73428E+00
0.14054E-02
110-260
CH3NO3
Methyl nitrate
293.2
23.9
CH4
Methane
91.0
1.6761
0.15996E+01
0.27434E-02
-0.22086E-04
91-184
CH4O
Methanol
293.2
33.0
0.19341E+03
-0.92211E+00
0.12839E-02
177-293
CH5N
Methylamine
215.2
16.7
0.34398E+02
-0.73630E-01
-0.41279E-04
198-258
CN4O8
Tetranitromethane
293.2
2.317
COS
Carbon oxysulfide
185.0
4.47
0.84702E+01
-0.21488E-01
143-185
COSe
Carbon oxyselenide
283.2
3.47
0.48740E+01
-0.49425E-02
219-283
CO2
Carbon dioxide
295.0
1.4492
0.79062E+00
0.10639E-01
-0.28510E-04
220-300
CS2
Carbon disulfide
293.2
2.6320
0.45024E+01
-0.12054E-01
0.19147E-04
154-319
C2Br2F4
1,2-Dibromotetrafluoroethane
298.2
2.34
C2Cl2F4
1,2-Dichlorotetrafluoroethane
273.2
2.4842
0.36663E+01
-0.42271E-02
-0.36255E-06
193-273
C2Cl2O2
Oxalyl chloride
294.35
3.470
C2Cl3N
Trichloroacetonitrile
292.2
7.85
C2Cl4
Tetrachloroethylene
303.2
2.268
C2Cl4F2
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloro-1,2-difluoroethane
308.2
2.52
C2HBr3O
Tribromoacetaldehyde
293.2
7.6
C2HCl3
Trichloroethylene
301.5
3.390
0.58319E+01
-0.80828E-02
302-338
C2HCl3F2
1,2,2-Trichloro-1,1-difluoroethane
303.2
4.01
0.75423E+01
-0.11667E-01
303-333
C2HCl3O
Trichloroacetaldehyde
298.2
6.8
C2HCl3O2
Trichloroacetic acid
333.2
4.34
0.13412E+01
0.90000E-02
-0.24130E-14
333-393
C2HCl5
Pentachloroethane
298.2
3.716
0.65972E+01
-0.96800E-02
298-338
C2HF3O2
Trifluoroacetic acid
293.2
8.42
0.21652E+02
-0.68146E-01
0.78571E-04
263-323
C2H2
Acetylene
195.0
2.4841
C2H2Br2
cis-1,2-Dibromoethylene
298.2
7.08
C2H2Br2
trans-1,2-Dibromoethylene
298.2
2.88
C2H2Br4
1,1,2,2-Tetrabromoethane
303.2
6.72
0.16246E+02
-0.31500E-01
303-333
C2H2Cl2
1,1-Dichloroethylene
293.2
4.60
C2H2Cl2
cis-1,2-Dichloroethylene
298.2
9.20
C2H2Cl2
trans-1,2-Dichloroethylene
293.2
2.14
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K


--- PAGE 1145 ---
TeamLRN
6-156
C2H2Cl2O2
Dichloroacetic acid
293.2
8.33
0.11014E+02
-0.10859E-01
0.49242E-05
284-363
C2H2Cl4
1,1,1,2-Tetrachloroethane
207.2
9.22
0.19606E+02
-0.49847E-01
207-233
C2H2Cl4
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane
293.2
8.50
C2H2I2
cis-1,2-Diiodoethylene
345.65
4.46
C2H3ClO
Acetyl chloride
295.2
15.8
C2H3ClO2
Chloroacetic acid
338.2
12.35
0.17310E+02
-0.14674E-01
338-393
C2H3Cl2NO2
1,1-Dichloro-1-nitroethane
303.2
16.3
0.37576E+02
-0.70400E-01
303-333
C2H3Cl3
1,1,1-Trichloroethane
293.2
7.243
0.27705E+02
-0.10621E+00
0.12424E-03
258-318
C2H3Cl3
1,1,2-Trichloroethane
298.2
7.1937
0.17147E+02
-0.33371E-01
288-318
C2H3F3O
2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol
293.2
27.68
0.90593E+02
-0.21421E+00
293-318
C2H3N
Acetonitrile
293.2
36.64
0.29724E+03
-0.15508E+01
0.22591E-02
288-333
C2H3NO
Methyl isocyanate
288.7
21.75
C2H4
Ethylene
270.0
1.4833
0.13546E+01
0.62614E-02
-0.21374E-04
200-270
C2H4BrCl
1-Bromo-2-chloroethane
283.2
7.41
0.19493E+02
-0.59054E-01
0.58036E-04
263-363
C2H4Br2
1,2-Dibromoethane
293.2
4.9612
0.67142E+01
-0.59800E-02
293-313
C2H4Cl2
1,1-Dichloroethane
298.2
10.10
0.24429E+02
-0.48000E-01
288-318
C2H4Cl2
1,2-Dichloroethane
293.2
10.42
0.24404E+02
-0.47892E-01
293-343
C2H4Cl2O
Bis(chloromethyl) ether
293.2
3.51
C2H4N2O6
Ethylene glycol dinitrate
293.2
28.26
C2H4O
Acetaldehyde
291.2
21.0
C2H4O
Ethylene oxide
293.2
12.42
0.52661E+02
-0.21337E+00
0.25947E-03
293-243
C2H4OS
Thioacetic acid
298.2
14.30
C2H4O2
Acetic acid
293.2
6.20
-0.15731E+02
0.12662E+00
-0.17738E-03
293-363
C2H4O2
Methyl formate
288.2
9.20
0.19699E+02
-0.36429E-01
288-302
C2H4O3S
Ethylene glycol sulfite
298.2
39.6
0.85483E+02
-0.15400E+00
298-328
C2H5Br
Bromoethane
298.2
9.01
0.28473E+02
-0.85495E-01
0.67971E-04
243-308
C2H5Cl
Chloroethane
293.2
9.45
0.60693E+02
-0.31290E+00
0.47154E-03
237-293
C2H5ClO
2-Chloroethanol
293.2
25.80
0.11155E+03
-0.30149E+00
140-175
C2H5I
Iodoethane
293.2
7.82
0.25598E+02
-0.94367E-01
0.11424E-03
183-343
C2H5N
Ethyleneimine
298.2
18.3
0.61405E+02
-0.14474E+00
273-298
C2H5NO
Acetamide
363.7
67.6
-0.20055E+03
0.15515E+01
-0.22392E-02
364-448
C2H5NO
N-Methylformamide
293.2
189.0
0.10383E+04
-0.43165E+01
0.48398E-02
276-353
C2H5NO
Acetaldoxime
298.2
4.70
C2H5NO2
Nitroethane
288.2
29.11
0.57406E+02
-0.97657E-01
276-333
C2H5NO2
Methyl carbamate
328.2
18.48
0.36773E+02
-0.55700E-01
328-368
C2H5NO3
Ethyl nitrate
293.2
19.7
C2H6
Ethane
95.0
1.9356
0.20185E+01
-0.51493E-03
-0.48148E-05
95-295
C2H6O
Ethanol
293.2
25.3
0.15145E+03
-0.87020E+00
0.19570E-02
163-523
C2H6O
Dimethyl ether
258.0
6.18
0.22389E+02
-0.86524E-01
0.91291E-04
155-258
C2H6OS
Dimethyl sulfoxide
293.2
47.24
0.38478E+02
0.16939E+00
-0.47423E-03
288-343
C2H6O2
Ethylene glycol
293.2
41.4
0.14355E+03
-0.48573E+00
0.46703E-03
293-423
C2H6O2S
Dimethyl sulfone
383.2
47.39
0.10830E+03
-0.15900E+00
383-398
C2H6O4S
Dimethyl sulfate
298.2
55.0
C2H6S
Ethanethiol
298.2
6.667
C2H6S
Dimethyl sulfide
294.2
6.70
C2H6S2
1,2-Ethanedithiol
293.2
7.26
0.11228E+02
-0.13500E-01
293-333
C2H6S2
Dimethyl disulfide
298.2
9.6
0.19109E+02
-0.32000E-01
298-323
C2H7N
Ethylamine
273.2
8.7
0.30163E+02
-0.79000E-01
233-273
C2H7NO
Ethanolamine
293.2
31.94
0.14890E+03
-0.62491E+00
0.77143E-03
253-293
C2H8N2
1,2-Ethanediamine
293.2
13.82
0.48922E+02
-0.17021E+00
0.17262E-03
273-333
C3Cl6O
Hexachloroacetone
291.9
3.925
0.76423E+01
-0.15838E-01
0.10618E-04
269-303
C3F6O
Perfluoroacetone
202.2
2.104
0.34809E+01
-0.92883E-02
0.12282E-04
151-238
C3HN
Cyanoacetylene
291.9
72.3
0.91803E+03
-0.49149E+01
0.69104E-02
281-314
C3H2F6O
1,1,1,3,3,3-Hexafluoro-2-propanol
293.2
16.70
C3H3ClO3
4-Chloro-1,3-dioxolan-2-one
313.2
62.0
C3H3N
Acrylonitrile
293.2
33.0
0.11109E+03
-0.36806E+00
0.34879E-03
233-413
C3H3NO2
Cyanoacetic acid
277.2
33.4
C3H4
Allene
269.0
2.025
0.26049E+01
-0.44147E-03
-0.63420E-05
156-269
C3H4
Propyne
246.0
3.218
0.60871E+01
-0.11730E-01
185-246
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K


--- PAGE 1146 ---
6-157
C3H4ClF3
3-Chloro-1,1,1-trifluoropropane
295.2
7.32
0.22361E+02
-0.68840E-01
0.60594E-04
275-313
C3H4ClNO
2-Chloroethyl isocyanate
288.2
29.1
0.64311E+02
-0.12217E+00
288-403
C3H4Cl2O
1,1-Dichloroacetone
293.2
14.6
C3H4F4O
2,2,3,3-Tetrafluoro-1-propanol
298.2
21.03
C3H4O
Propargyl alcohol
293.2
20.8
0.99895E+02
-0.38911E+00
0.40776E-03
213-293
C3H4O3
Ethylene carbonate
313.2
89.78
0.20746E+03
-0.37610E+00
313-343
C3H5Br
3-Bromopropene
293.2
7.0
C3H5BrO2
2-Bromopropanoic acid
294.2
11.0
C3H5Br3
1,2,3-Tribromopropane
303.2
6.00
0.11024E+02
-0.16596E-01
303-358
C3H5Cl
2-Chloropropene
299.25
8.92
C3H5Cl
3-Chloropropene
293.2
8.2
C3H5ClN2O6
3-Chloro-1,2-propanediol dinitrate
293.2
17.50
C3H5ClO
Epichlorohydrin
293.2
22.6
C3H5ClO2
Ethyl chloroformate
308.7
9.736
0.15356E+02
-0.18250E-01
309-349
C3H5ClO2
Methyl chloroacetate
293.2
12.0
C3H5Cl3
1,2,3-Trichloropropane
293.2
7.5
C3H5I
3-Iodopropene
292.2
6.1
C3H5N
Propanenitrile
293.2
29.7
0.82222E+02
-0.22937E+00
0.17424E-03
213-473
C3H5NO
Ethyl isocyanate
293.2
19.7
C3H5NS
Ethyl isothiocyanate
293.2
19.6
C3H5N3O9
Trinitroglycerol
293.2
19.25
C3H6
Propene
220.0
2.1365
0.29623E+01
-0.37564E-02
220-250
C3H6Br2
1,2-Dibromopropane
283.2
4.60
0.54973E+01
-0.31695E-02
283-333
C3H6Br2
1,3-Dibromopropane
293.2
9.482
0.29193E+02
-0.94450E-01
0.92800E-04
293-368
C3H6ClNO2
2-Chloro-2-nitropropane
250.4
31.90
C3H6Cl2
1,2-Dichloropropane
293.2
8.37
0.18915E+02
-0.35907E-01
281-323
C3H6Cl2
1,3-Dichloropropane
303.2
10.27
0.21609E+02
-0.37333E-01
303-333
C3H6Cl2
2,2-Dichloropropane
293.2
11.37
0.32421E+02
-0.72188E-01
245-293
C3H6N2O4
2,2-Dinitropropane
325.1
42.4
C3H6O
Allyl alcohol
293.2
19.7
0.62714E+02
-0.14771E+00
0.37879E-05
213-303
C3H6O
Propanal
290.2
18.5
C3H6O
Acetone
293.2
21.01
0.88157E+02
-0.34300E+00
0.38925E-03
273-323
C3H6O2
Propanoic acid
298.2
3.44
0.18793E+01
0.46841E-02
0.19983E-05
289-408
C3H6O2
Ethyl formate
288.2
8.57
0.15884E+02
-0.25333E-01
288-318
C3H6O2
Methyl acetate
288.2
7.07
0.13190E+02
-0.21226E-01
276-318
C3H6O3
3-Hydroxypropanoic acid
296.2
30.0
C3H6O3
Dimethyl carbonate
298.2
3.087
C3H6O3
1,3,5-Trioxane
338.2
15.55
C3H7Br
1-Bromopropane
293.2
8.09
0.17769E+02
-0.32599E-01
274-328
C3H7Br
2-Bromopropane
293.2
9.46
0.26195E+02
-0.72995E-01
0.55454E-04
186-328
C3H7Cl
1-Chloropropane
293.2
8.588
0.21214E+02
-0.43130E-01
273-313
C3H7ClO
3-Chloro-1-propanol
215.2
36.0
0.12436E+03
-0.60841E+00
0.92060E-03
145-215
C3H7ClO
1-Chloro-2-propanol
153.2
59.0
-0.19169E+02
0.13605E+01
-0.55567E-02
153-177
C3H7ClO2
3-Chloro-1,2-propanediol
293.2
31.0
C3H7I
1-Iodopropane
293.2
7.07
0.13744E+02
-0.22745E-01
293-323
C3H7I
2-Iodopropane
298.2
8.19
C3H7NO
N-Ethylformamide
298.2
102.7
0.64764E+03
-0.28499E+01
0.34286E-02
298-338
C3H7NO
N,N-Dimethylformamide
293.2
38.25
0.15364E+03
-0.60367E+00
0.71505E-03
213-353
C3H7NO
N-Methylacetamide
303.2
179.0
0.15975E+04
-0.90451E+01
0.18345E-01
303-473
C3H7NO2
1-Nitropropane
288.2
24.70
0.94999E+02
-0.38358E+00
0.48480E-03
276-333
C3H7NO2
2-Nitropropane
288.2
26.74
0.60138E+02
-0.11566E+00
276-303
C3H7NO2
Propyl nitrite
250.0
12.35
0.70552E+02
-0.40362E+00
0.66687E-03
110-310
C3H7NO2
Isopropyl nitrite
260.0
13.92
0.74578E+02
-0.38283E+00
0.57071E-03
150-300
C3H7NO2
Ethyl carbamate
328.2
14.14
0.32431E+02
-0.65097E-01
0.28571E-04
328-368
C3H8
Propane
293.19
1.6678
0.22883E+01
-0.23276E-02
0.84710E-06
90-300
C3H8O
1-Propanol
293.2
20.8
0.98045E+02
-0.36860E+00
0.36422E-03
193-493
C3H8O
2-Propanol
293.2
20.18
0.10416E+03
-0.41011E+00
0.42049E-03
193-493
C3H8O2
1,2-Propylene glycol
303.2
27.5
0.24546E+03
-0.15738E+01
0.38068E-02
193-403
C3H8O2
1,3-Propylene glycol
293.2
35.1
0.11365E+03
-0.36680E+00
0.33766E-03
288-328
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K


--- PAGE 1147 ---
TeamLRN
6-158
C3H8O2
Ethylene glycol monomethyl ether
298.2
17.2
0.11803E+03
-0.58000E+00
0.81001E-03
254-318
C3H8O2
Dimethoxymethane
293.2
2.644
0.25877E+01
-0.93019E-03
0.38472E-05
171-293
C3H8O3
Glycerol
293.2
46.53
0.77503E+02
-0.37984E-01
-0.23107E-03
288-343
C3H8S
1-Propanethiol
288.2
5.937
0.11602E+02
-0.19580E-01
273-318
C3H8S
2-Propanethiol
298.2
5.952
C3H8S2
1,2-Propanedithiol
293.2
7.24
0.14667E+02
-0.32660E-01
0.25000E-04
293-333
C3H8S2
1,3-Propanedithiol
303.2
8.11
0.66607E+01
0.31310E-01
-0.87500E-04
303-343
C3H9BO3
Trimethyl borate
293.2
2.2762
C3H9ClSi
Trimethylchlorosilane
273.2
10.21
-0.19492E+02
0.29806E+00
-0.69284E-03
223-273
C3H9N
Propylamine
296.2
5.08
0.17719E+02
-0.59022E-01
0.54780E-04
204-296
C3H9N
Isopropylamine
293.2
5.6268
0.40429E+02
-0.21441E+00
0.32634E-03
213-298
C3H9N
Trimethylamine
298.2
2.440
0.39745E+01
-0.51331E-02
273-298
C3H9O4P
Trimethyl phosphate
293.2
20.6
C4Cl6
Hexachloro-1,3-butadiene
293.2
2.55
C4Cl6O3
Trichloroacetic anhydride
298.2
5.0
C4F6O3
Trifluoroacetic acid anhydride
298.2
2.7
C4H2Cl4O3
Dichloroacetic anhydride
298.2
15.8
C4H2O3
Maleic anhydride
326.2
52.75
C4H3F7O
2,2,3,3,4,4,4-Heptafluoro-1-butanol
298.2
14.4
C4H4N2
Succinonitrile
298.2
62.6
0.17724E+03
-0.54654E+00
0.54046E-03
236-351
C4H4N2
Pyrazine
323.2
2.80
C4H4O
Furan
277.1
2.88
0.13636E+01
0.12864E-01
-0.22701E-04
188-277
C4H4S
Thiophene
293.2
2.739
0.32941E+01
-0.19019E-02
253-293
C4H5Cl
2-Chloro-1,3-butadiene
293.2
4.914
C4H5Cl3O2
Ethyl trichloroacetate
293.2
8.428
C4H5N
Pyrrole
293.0
8.00
0.12672E+02
-0.14075E-01
-0.62671E-05
293-357
C4H5NO
Allyl isocynate
288.2
15.15
0.34299E+02
-0.66444E-01
288-333
C4H6
1,3-Butadiene
265.0
2.050
0.27674E+01
-0.26738E-02
185-265
C4H6O
Divinyl ether
288.2
3.94
C4H6O
Ethoxyacetylene
298.2
8.05
C4H6O
Cyclobutanone
298.2
14.27
0.43974E+02
-0.15712E+00
0.19264E-03
220-317
C4H6O2
Methyl acrylate
303.2
7.03
0.11968E+02
-0.16500E-01
303-333
C4H6O2
2,3-Butanedione
298.2
4.04
0.46907E+01
-0.22302E-02
278-348
C4H6O2
γ-Butyrolactone
293.2
39.0
C4H6O3
Acetic anhydride
293.2
22.45
C4H6O3
Propylene carbonate
293.0
66.14
0.15940E+03
-0.39530E+00
0.26284E-03
273-333
C4H7Br
cis-2-Bromo-2-butene
293.2
5.38
C4H7Br
trans-2-Bromo-2-butene
293.2
6.76
C4H7BrO2
2-Bromobutanoic acid
293.2
7.2
C4H7BrO2
Ethyl bromoacetate
303.2
9.75
0.15627E+02
-0.19600E-01
303-333
C4H7BrO2
Methyl 3-bromopropanoate
303.2
5.81
0.36001E+01
0.72500E-02
303-343
C4H7ClO2
Propyl chlorocarbonate
293.2
11.2
C4H7ClO2
Methyl 2-chloropropanoate
303.2
11.45
0.22449E+02
-0.36250E-01
303-343
C4H7N
Butanenitrile
293.2
24.83
0.53884E+02
-0.99257E-01
293-333
C4H7N
2-Methylpropanenitrile
293.2
24.42
0.52554E+02
-0.96000E-01
293-313
C4H7NO
2-Pyrrolidone
298.2
28.18
0.11054E+03
-0.47945E+00
0.68182E-03
298-338
C4H8
1-Butene
220.0
2.2195
0.29354E+01
-0.32580E-02
220-250
C4H8
cis-2-Butene
296.0
1.960
0.28802E+01
-0.31064E-02
197-296
C4H8
Isobutene
288.7
2.1225
0.33701E+01
-0.43295E-02
220-289
C4H8Br2
1,2-Dibromobutane
293.2
4.74
0.11199E+03
-0.63334E+00
0.91250E-03
293-333
C4H8Br2
1,3-Dibromobutane
293.2
9.14
0.34031E+02
-0.13254E+00
0.16250E-03
293-333
C4H8Br2
1,4-Dibromobutane
303.2
8.68
0.20944E+02
-0.55620E-01
0.50000E-04
303-333
C4H8Br2
2,3-Dibromobutane
298.2
6.245
0.23849E+02
-0.96300E-01
0.12500E-03
293-333
C4H8Br2
1,2-Dibromo-2-methylpropane
293.2
4.1
C4H8Cl2
1,2-Dichlorobutane
293.2
7.74
0.31925E+02
-0.13232E+00
0.17007E-03
293-356
C4H8Cl2
1,4-Dichlorobutane
308.2
9.30
0.59766E+01
0.49300E-01
-0.12500E-03
308-338
C4H8Cl2
1,2-Dichloro-2-methylpropane
296.0
7.15
0.39429E+02
-0.20028E+00
0.30917E-03
165-296
C4H8Cl2O
Bis(2-chloroethyl) ether
293.2
21.20
C4H8O
Butanal
298.2
13.45
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K


--- PAGE 1148 ---
6-159
C4H8O
2-Butanone
293.2
18.56
0.15457E+02
0.90152E-01
-0.27100E-03
293-333
C4H8O
Tetrahydrofuran
295.2
7.52
0.30739E+02
-0.12946E+00
0.17195E-03
224-295
C4H8O2
Butanoic acid
287.2
2.98
0.15010E+01
0.50046E-02
287-403
C4H8O2
2-Methylpropanoic acid
293.2
2.58
C4H8O2
Propyl formate
303.2
6.92
C4H8O2
Ethyl acetate
293.2
6.0814
0.15646E+02
-0.44066E-01
0.39137E-04
293-433
C4H8O2
Methyl propanoate
293.2
6.200
0.12798E+02
-0.22540E-01
293-333
C4H8O2
1,4-Dioxane
293.2
2.2189
0.27299E+01
-0.17440E-02
293-313
C4H8O3
2-Hydroxybutanoic acid
296.2
37.7
C4H8O3
3-Hydroxybutanoic acid
296.2
31.5
C4H8O3
Ethyl methyl carbonate
293.2
2.985
C4H8O3
Ethylene glycol monoacetate
303.2
12.95
C4H9Br
1-Bromobutane
283.2
7.315
0.22542E+02
-0.79306E-01
0.89867E-04
183-363
C4H9Br
2-Bromobutane
298.2
8.64
0.18461E+02
-0.32933E-01
274-328
C4H9Br
1-Bromo-2-methylpropane
273.2
7.70
0.37558E+02
-0.20571E+00
0.35496E-03
112-273
C4H9Br
2-Bromo-2-methylpropane
293.0
10.98
0.35085E+02
-0.14075E+00
0.19960E-03
258-293
C4H9Cl
1-Chlorobutane
293.2
7.276
0.13565E+02
-0.10161E-01
-0.38750E-04
273-323
C4H9Cl
2-Chlorobutane
293.2
8.564
0.30376E+02
-0.11377E+00
0.13429E-03
273-323
C4H9Cl
1-Chloro-2-methylpropane
293.2
7.027
0.14945E+02
-0.33747E-01
0.23036E-04
273-323
C4H9Cl
2-Chloro-2-methylpropane
293.2
9.663
0.35077E+02
-0.12867E+00
0.14304E-03
273-323
C4H9I
1-Iodobutane
293.2
6.27
0.16493E+02
-0.50262E-01
0.52485E-04
293-323
C4H9I
2-Iodobutane
293.2
7.873
0.10883E+02
-0.14680E-02
-0.30000E-04
293-323
C4H9I
2-Iodo-2-methylpropane
283.2
6.65
0.76780E+01
0.69900E-02
-0.37500E-04
283-323
C4H9N
Pyrrolidine
293.0
8.30
0.38191E+02
-0.15462E+00
0.17941E-03
274-333
C4H9NO
N-Methylpropanamide
293.2
170.0
C4H9NO
N-Ethylacetamide
293.2
135.0
0.74494E+03
-0.31400E+01
0.36131E-02
213-353
C4H9NO
N,N-Dimethylacetamide
294.2
38.85
0.15420E+03
-0.57506E+00
0.61911E-03
294-433
C4H9NO
2-Butanone oxime
293.2
3.4
C4H9NO
Morpholine
298.2
7.42
C4H9NO2
tert-Butyl nitrite
298.2
11.47
C4H9NO2
Propyl carbamate
338.2
12.06
0.24356E+02
-0.36400E-01
338-378
C4H9NO2
Ethyl-N-methyl carbamate
298.2
21.10
0.11477E+03
-0.47568E+00
0.54127E-03
298-373
C4H9NO2
N-Acetylethanolamine
298.2
96.6
0.37016E+03
-0.13113E+01
0.13214E-02
298-348
C4H9NO3
Butyl nitrate
293.2
13.10
C4H10
Butane
295.0
1.7697
0.22379E+01
-0.13884E-02
-0.66711E-06
135-303
C4H10
Isobutane
295.0
1.7518
0.23295E+01
-0.19953E-02
0.14197E-06
115-303
C4H10O
1-Butanol
293.2
17.84
0.10578E+03
-0.50587E+00
0.84733E-03
193-553
C4H10O
2-Butanol
293.2
17.26
0.13850E+03
-0.75146E+00
0.14086E-02
172-533
C4H10O
2-Methyl-1-propanol
293.2
17.93
0.10762E+03
-0.51398E+00
0.83702E-03
173-533
C4H10O
2-Methyl-2-propanol
298.2
12.47
0.22541E+03
-0.14990E+01
0.34050E-02
298-503
C4H10O
Diethyl ether
293.2
4.2666
0.79725E+01
-0.12519E-01
283-301
C4H10O2
1,2-Butanediol
298.2
22.4
0.63702E+02
-0.13807E+00
278-323
C4H10O2
1,3-Butanediol
298.2
28.8
0.72883E+02
-0.14770E+00
278-323
C4H10O2
1,4-Butanediol
298.2
31.9
0.13079E+03
-0.46985E+00
0.46320E-03
288-328
C4H10O2
Ethylene glycol monoethyl ether
298.2
13.38
C4H10O2
Ethylene glycol dimethyl ether
296.7
7.30
0.48832E+02
-0.24218E+00
0.34413E-03
256-318
C4H10O2S
Bis(2-hydroxyethyl) sulfide
293.2
28.61
0.13128E+03
-0.52719E+00
0.60465E-03
253-333
C4H10O3
Diethylene glycol
293.2
31.82
0.13973E+03
-0.54725E+00
0.61149E-03
288-343
C4H10O3S
Diethyl sulfite
293.2
15.6
C4H10O4
1,2,3,4-Butanetetrol
393.2
28.2
C4H10O4S
Diethyl sulfate
293.2
29.2
C4H10S
1-Butanethiol
288.2
5.204
0.11201E+02
-0.20767E-01
273-318
C4H10S
2-Butanethiol
288.2
5.645
0.10866E+02
-0.17993E-01
273-318
C4H10S
2-Methyl-1-propanethiol
298.2
4.961
C4H10S
2-Methyl-2-propanethiol
293.2
5.475
0.10597E+02
-0.17500E-01
283-313
C4H10S
Diethyl sulfide
298.2
5.723
C4H11N
Butylamine
293.2
4.71
0.13322E+02
-0.44176E-01
0.50250E-04
223-333
C4H11N
Diethylamine
293.2
3.680
0.26462E+02
-0.13750E+00
0.20373E-03
243-323
C4H11NO2
Diethanolamine
293.2
25.75
0.73435E+02
-0.21377E+00
0.17500E-03
273-323
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K


--- PAGE 1149 ---
TeamLRN
6-160
C4H12O2Si
Dimethoxydimethylsilane
298.2
3.663
C4H12O3Si
Trimethoxymethylsilane
298.2
4.9
C4H12O4Si
Tetramethyl silicate
293.2
6.0
C4H12Si
Diethylsilane
293.2
2.544
C4H12Si
Tetramethylsilane
293.2
1.921
C4H13N3
Diethylenetriamine
293.2
12.62
0.57840E+02
-0.23873E+00
0.28841E-03
213-333
C5FeO5
Iron pentacarbonyl
293.2
2.602
C5H4BrN
2-Bromopyridine
298.2
23.18
0.73391E+02
-0.23678E+00
0.22930E-03
298-398
C5H4ClN
2-Chloropyridine
298.2
27.32
0.98702E+02
-0.34237E+00
0.34502E-03
298-398
C5H4F8O
2,2,3,3,4,4,5,5-Octafluoro-1-pentanol
298.2
15.30
C5H4O2
Furfural
293.2
42.1
C5H5N
Pyridine
293.2
13.260
0.43991E+02
-0.15150E+00
0.15925E-03
293-323
C5H5NO
Pyridine-1-oxide
343.0
35.94
0.20878E+02
0.16450E+00
-0.35269E-03
343-398
C5H6O
2-Methylfuran
293.2
2.76
C5H6O2
Furfuryl alcohol
298.2
16.85
C5H7Cl3O2
Propyl trichloroacetate
298.2
8.32
C5H7NO2
Ethyl cyanoacetate
263.2
31.62
C5H8
1,3-Pentadiene*
298.2
2.319
C5H8
1,4-Pentadiene
294.0
2.054
0.29994E+01
-0.34578E-02
0.85300E-06
178-294
C5H8
2-Methyl-1,3-butadiene
293.2
2.098
0.28170E+01
-0.23147E-02
-0.43975E-06
198-293
C5H8
Cyclopentene
295.0
2.083
0.28177E+01
-0.27597E-02
0.89346E-06
171-319
C5H8O
Cyclopentanone
298.2
13.58
0.24083E+02
-0.30286E-01
-0.16802E-04
219-298
C5H8O2
Ethyl acrylate
303.2
6.05
0.47827E+02
-0.24394E+00
0.35000E-03
303-343
C5H8O2
Methyl trans-2-butenoate
293.2
6.6645
C5H8O2
Methyl methacrylate
303.2
6.32
0.32098E+02
-0.14568E+00
0.20000E-03
303-343
C5H8O2
2,4-Pentanedione
303.2
26.524
C5H8O4
Dimethyl malonate
293.2
9.82
0.26470E+02
-0.76656E-01
0.67888E-04
293-433
C5H9BrO2
Ethyl 2-bromopropanoate
293.2
9.4
C5H9ClO2
Isobutyl chlorocarbonate
293.2
9.1
C5H9ClO2
Ethyl 2-chloropropanoate
303.2
11.95
0.25965E+02
-0.46250E-01
303-343
C5H9ClO2
Ethyl 3-chloropropanoate
303.2
10.19
0.21951E+02
-0.38750E-01
303-343
C5H9ClO2
Methyl 4-chlorobutanoate
303.2
9.51
0.17127E+02
-0.25000E-01
303-343
C5H9N
Pentanenitrile
293.2
20.04
0.55793E+02
-0.15750E+00
0.12432E-03
183-333
C5H9N
2,2-Dimethylpropanenitrile
293.2
21.1
0.58418E+02
-0.16884E+00
0.14131E-03
293-453
C5H9NO
Isobutyl isocyanate
293.2
11.638
0.38026E+02
-0.12714E+00
0.12679E-03
293-353
C5H9NO
N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone
293.2
32.55
C5H10
1-Pentene
293.2
2.011
-0.11438E+01
0.25420E-01
-0.50000E-04
273-293
C5H10
2-Methyl-1-butene
293.2
2.180
C5H10
2-Methyl-2-butene
296.0
1.979
0.26064E+01
-0.19578E-02
-0.53908E-06
225-296
C5H10
Cyclopentane
293.2
1.9687
0.24287E+01
-0.15304E-02
-0.13095E-06
278-313
C5H10
Ethylcyclopropane
293.2
1.933
C5H10Br2
1,2-Dibromopentane
298.2
4.39
C5H10Br2
1,4-Dibromopentane
293.2
9.05
0.26443E+02
-0.88640E-01
0.10000E-03
293-333
C5H10Br2
1,5-Dibromopentane
303.2
9.14
0.38192E+02
-0.15648E+00
0.20000E-03
303-333
C5H10Cl2
1,2-Dichloropentane
293.2
6.89
0.19016E+02
-0.57954E-01
0.56801E-04
293-356
C5H10Cl2
1,5-Dichloropentane
298.2
9.92
C5H10O
Cyclopentanol
288.2
18.5
0.10565E+03
-0.44244E+00
0.48657E-03
258-323
C5H10O
Pentanal
293.2
10.00
C5H10O
2,2-Dimethylpropanal
293.2
9.051
0.18645E+02
-0.32395E-01
-0.16157E-05
280-333
C5H10O
2-Pentanone
293.2
15.45
0.40893E+02
-0.10423E+00
0.60557E-04
204-353
C5H10O
3-Pentanone
293.2
17.00
0.12690E+02
0.95177E-01
-0.27321E-03
233-353
C5H10O
3-Methyl-2-butanone
293.2
10.37
0.30695E+02
-0.10962E+00
0.13810E-03
293-328
C5H10O
Tetrahydropyran
293.2
5.66
0.19793E+02
-0.76071E-01
0.94852E-04
234-333
C5H10O
2-Methyltetrahydrofuran
298.2
6.97
C5H10O2
Pentanoic acid
294.4
2.661
0.33491E+01
-0.75156E-02
0.17820E-04
250-344
C5H10O2
Butyl formate
303.2
6.10
0.21532E+02
-0.84106E-01
0.10952E-03
288-323
C5H10O2
Isobutyl formate
293.2
6.41
C5H10O2
Propyl acetate
293.2
5.62
0.17677E+02
-0.61404E-01
0.69196E-04
253-353
C5H10O2
Ethyl propanoate
293.2
5.76
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K


--- PAGE 1150 ---
6-161
C5H10O2
Methyl butanoate
301.2
5.48
0.38604E+02
-0.19171E+00
0.27128E-03
301-343
C5H10O2
Tetrahydrofurfuryl alcohol
303.2
13.48
C5H10O2S
3-Methyl sulfolane
298.2
29.4
0.53158E+02
-0.93730E-01
0.47275E-04
298-398
C5H10O3
Diethyl carbonate
297.2
2.820
C5H10O3
Ethyl lactate
303.2
15.4
0.31225E+02
-0.43531E-01
-0.28571E-04
273-373
C5H10O4
1,2,3-Propanetriol-1-acetate
242.2
38.57
0.10653E+03
-0.26439E+00
-0.62371E-04
215-242
C5H11Br
2-Bromo-2-methylbutane
298.2
9.21
C5H11Br
1-Bromopentane
299.2
6.31
0.20954E+02
-0.78743E-01
0.98908E-04
183-328
C5H11Br
3-Bromopentane
298.2
8.37
C5H11Br
1-Bromo-3-methylbutane
291.5
6.33
0.27743E+02
-0.13927E+00
0.22627E-03
123-292
C5H11Cl
1-Chloropentane
293.2
6.654
0.18626E+02
-0.54719E-01
0.47143E-04
273-323
C5H11Cl
1-Chloro-3-methylbutane
292.0
6.10
0.22228E+02
-0.93189E-01
0.12991E-03
171-297
C5H11Cl
2-Chloro-2-methylbutane
222.75
12.31
0.55104E+02
-0.29866E+00
0.47840E-03
201-223
C5H11F
1-Fluoropentane
293.2
3.931
C5H11I
1-Iodopentane
293.2
5.78
0.15753E+02
-0.50543E-01
0.56401E-04
293-323
C5H11I
3-Iodopentane
293.2
7.432
C5H11I
1-Iodo-3-methylbutane
292.2
5.6
C5H11I
2-Iodo-2-methylbutane
293.2
8.192
C5H11N
Piperidine
293.0
4.33
0.82317E+01
-0.11229E-01
-0.71429E-05
293-333
C5H11N
N-Methylpyrrolidine
298.2
32.2
C5H11NO
2,2-Dimethylpropanamide
298.2
20.13
0.10400E+03
-0.46017E+00
0.60000E-03
298-328
C5H11NO
N,N-Diethylformamide
293.2
29.6
C5H11NO
2-Pentanone oxime
293.2
3.3
C5H11NO2
Pentyl nitrite
298.2
7.21
C5H12
Pentane
293.2
1.8371
C5H12
Isopentane
293.2
1.845
0.22384E+01
-0.12985E-02
-0.16182E-06
143-293
C5H12
Neopentane
296.0
1.769
0.10949E+02
-0.63057E-01
0.10835E-03
251-296
C5H12N2O
Tetramethylurea
293.2
23.10
C5H12O
1-Pentanol
298.2
15.13
0.73397E+02
-0.28165E+00
0.28427E-03
213-513
C5H12O
2-Pentanol
298.2
13.71
0.16437E+03
-0.86506E+00
0.11955E-02
273-323
C5H12O
3-Pentanol
298.2
13.35
0.12838E+03
-0.60980E+00
0.75000E-03
288-318
C5H12O
2-Methyl-1-butanol
298.2
15.63
0.14020E+02
0.13948E+00
-0.45000E-03
288-318
C5H12O
3-Methyl-1-butanol
293.2
15.63
0.79733E+02
-0.31272E+00
0.32014E-03
173-513
C5H12O
2-Methyl-2-butanol
298.2
5.78
0.11662E+03
-0.69756E+00
0.10920E-02
268-318
C5H12O
3-Methyl-2-butanol
298.2
12.1
C5H12O
2,2-Dimethyl-1-propanol
333.2
8.35
0.92350E+02
-0.41870E+00
0.50000E-03
333-373
C5H12O2
1,2-Pentanediol
296.8
17.31
0.18436E+03
-0.10682E+01
0.17037E-02
197-297
C5H12O2
1,4-Pentanediol
295.7
26.74
0.13568E+03
-0.59198E+00
0.75398E-03
193-318
C5H12O2
1,5-Pentanediol
293.2
26.2
0.11858E+03
-0.45920E+00
0.49341E-03
243-343
C5H12O2
2,3-Pentanediol
296.9
17.37
0.95876E+02
-0.46463E+00
0.67434E-03
238-297
C5H12O2
2,4-Pentanediol
294.2
24.69
0.11914E+03
-0.52569E+00
0.69607E-03
224-294
C5H12O2
Diethoxymethane
293.2
2.527
0.25294E+01
0.73988E-04
-0.28331E-06
227-293
C5H12O4
Tetramethoxymethane
293.2
2.40
C5H12O5
Xylitol
293.2
40.0
C5H12S
1-Pentanethiol
293.2
4.847
0.71131E+01
-0.30228E-02
-0.16414E-04
273-333
C5H12S
2-Methyl-2-butanethiol
293.2
5.087
0.15116E+02
-0.50700E-01
0.56250E-04
273-333
C5H12S4
Tetrakis(methylthio)methane
343.2
2.818
C5H13N
Pentylamine
293.2
4.27
0.11274E+02
-0.34965E-01
0.37706E-04
223-353
C5H13N3
1,1,3,3-Tetramethylguanidine
298.2
11.5
C5H14OSi
Ethoxytrimethylsilane
298.2
3.013
C6F6
Hexafluorobenzene
298.2
2.029
0.24041E+01
-0.83086E-03
-0.14286E-05
298-338
C6F14
Perfluorohexane
298.2
1.76
C6H3N3O7
2,4,6-Trinitrophenol
294.2
4.0
C6H4BrF
1-Bromo-2-fluorobenzene
298.2
4.72
C6H4BrF
1-Bromo-3-fluorobenzene
298.2
4.85
C6H4BrF
1-Bromo-4-fluorobenzene
298.2
2.60
C6H4BrNO2
1-Bromo-3-nitrobenzene
328.2
20.2
0.81413E+02
-0.27645E+00
0.27367E-03
328-413
C6H4Br2
o-Dibromobenzene
293.2
7.86
-0.81849E-02
0.62671E-01
-0.12222E-03
293-353
C6H4Br2
m-Dibromobenzene
293.2
4.81
0.93214E+01
-0.20273E-01
0.16667E-04
293-353
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K


--- PAGE 1151 ---
TeamLRN
6-162
C6H4Br2
p-Dibromobenzene
368.2
2.57
C6H4ClF
1-Chloro-2-fluorobenzene
298.2
6.10
C6H4ClF
1-Chloro-3-fluorobenzene
298.2
4.96
C6H4ClF
1-Chloro-4-fluorobenzene
298.2
3.34
C6H4ClNO2
1-Chloro-2-nitrobenzene
323.2
37.7
0.16800E+03
-0.59708E+00
0.59957E-03
323-436
C6H4ClNO2
1-Chloro-3-nitrobenzene
323.2
20.9
0.77193E+02
-0.25118E+00
0.23798E-03
323-433
C6H4ClNO2
1-Chloro-4-nitrobenzene
393.2
8.09
C6H4Cl2
o-Dichlorobenzene
293.2
10.12
0.13629E+02
0.10622E-02
-0.44444E-04
293-353
C6H4Cl2
m-Dichlorobenzene
293.2
5.02
0.77565E+01
-0.93333E-02
-0.26880E-14
293-353
C6H4Cl2
p-Dichlorobenzene
328.2
2.3943
0.26999E+01
-0.35325E-03
-0.17619E-05
328-363
C6H4FI
1-Fluoro-2-iodobenzene
298.2
8.22
C6H4FI
1-Fluoro-4-iodobenzene
298.2
3.12
C6H4F2
o-Difluorobenzene
301.2
13.38
0.59107E+02
-0.23611E+00
0.27987E-03
273-323
C6H4F2
m-Difluorobenzene
301.2
5.01
0.14448E+02
-0.46982E-01
0.51948E-04
273-323
C6H4I2
o-Diiodobenzene
323.2
5.41
0.31150E+02
-0.14428E+00
0.20000E-03
323-353
C6H4I2
m-Diiodobenzene
323.2
4.11
C6H4I2
p-Diiodobenzene
393.2
2.88
C6H4N2
2-Pyridinecarbonitrile
303.2
93.77
0.45596E+03
-0.17746E+01
0.19105E-02
303-398
C6H4N2
3-Pyridinecarbonitrile
323.2
20.54
0.60484E+02
-0.17280E+00
0.15218E-03
323-398
C6H4N2
4-Pyridinecarbonitrile
353.2
5.23
0.12533E+02
-0.30115E-01
0.26674E-04
353-398
C6H4N2O4
1,3-Dinitrobenzene
365.2
22.9
0.10406E+03
-0.34133E+00
0.32609E-03
365-413
C6H5Br
Bromobenzene
293.2
5.45
0.94100E+01
-0.12537E-01
-0.31127E-05
234-333
C6H5Cl
Chlorobenzene
293.2
5.6895
0.19471E+02
-0.70786E-01
0.82466E-04
293-430
C6H5ClO
o-Chlorophenol
296.2
7.40
0.29755E+02
-0.11256E+00
0.12390E-03
296-448
C6H5ClO
m-Chlorophenol
293.2
6.255
C6H5ClO
p-Chlorophenol
314.2
11.18
0.31997E+02
-0.94241E-01
0.88392E-04
314-453
C6H5ClO2S
Benzenesulfonyl chloride
323.2
28.90
0.83886E+02
-0.23405E+00
0.19713E-03
323-473
C6H5ClS
4-Chlorobenzenethiol
338.2
3.59
C6H5F
Fluorobenzene
293.2
5.465
C6H5I
Iodobenzene
293.2
4.59
0.89442E+01
-0.20008E-01
0.17641E-04
243-323
C6H5NOS
N-Sulfinylaniline
298.2
6.97
C6H5NO2
Nitrobenzene
293.0
35.6
0.11212E+03
-0.35211E+00
0.31128E-03
279-533
C6H5NO3
o-Nitrophenol
323.2
16.50
0.33827E+02
-0.62123E-01
0.26774E-04
323-453
C6H5NO3
m-Nitrophenol
373.2
35.45
0.18967E+03
-0.66144E+00
0.66532E-03
373-458
C6H5NO3
p-Nitrophenol
393.2
42.20
0.22901E+03
-0.74264E+00
0.68006E-03
393-463
C6H6
Benzene
293.2
2.2825
0.26706E+01
-0.91648E-03
-0.14257E-05
293-513
C6H6BrN
m-Bromoaniline
293.2
13.0
C6H6ClN
o-Chloroaniline
293.2
13.40
C6H6ClN
m-Chloroaniline
293.2
13.3
C6H6N2O2
o-Nitroaniline
353.0
47.3
0.18900E+03
-0.56977E+00
0.47484E-03
353-468
C6H6N2O2
m-Nitroaniline
398.0
35.6
0.20352E+03
-0.66582E+00
0.61310E-03
398-468
C6H6N2O2
p-Nitroaniline
428.0
78.5
0.48673E+03
-0.15040E+01
0.12857E-02
428-468
C6H6O
Phenol
303.2
12.40
0.63391E+02
-0.24988E+00
0.26930E-03
303-433
C6H6O2
Pyrocatechol
388.2
17.57
0.74930E+02
-0.22142E+00
0.18919E-03
388-463
C6H6O2
Resorcinol
393.2
13.55
0.30252E+02
-0.56443E-01
0.35578E-04
393-463
C6H6S
Benzenethiol
303.2
4.26
0.57155E+01
-0.70336E-02
0.73617E-05
303-358
C6H7N
Aniline
293.2
7.06
0.89534E+01
0.38990E-02
-0.36310E-04
293-413
C6H7N
2-Methylpyridine
293.2
10.18
0.34560E+02
-0.11980E+00
0.12500E-03
293-333
C6H7N
3-Methylpyridine
303.0
11.10
0.19643E+03
-0.11167E+01
0.16667E-02
303-333
C6H7N
4-Methylpyridine
293.0
12.2
0.33765E+02
-0.10113E+00
0.93860E-04
274-333
C6H7NO
2-Methylpyridine-1-oxide
323.2
36.4
0.11705E+03
-0.35301E+00
0.32000E-03
323-398
C6H7NO
3-Methylpyridine-1-oxide
318.2
28.26
0.59851E+02
-0.12682E+00
0.86622E-04
318-398
C6H8
1,3-Cyclohexadiene
184.2
2.68
C6H8
1,4-Cyclohexadiene
296.0
2.211
0.27459E+01
-0.16975E-02
-0.36461E-06
232-356
C6H8N2
Phenylhydrazine
293.2
7.15
C6H8N2
2,5-Dimethylpyrazine
293.2
2.436
C6H8N2
2,6-Dimethylpyrazine
308.2
2.653
C6H8O2
1,4-Cyclohexanedione
351.2
4.40
C6H9Cl3O2
Butyl trichloroacetate
293.2
7.480
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K


--- PAGE 1152 ---
6-163
C6H9Cl3O2
Isobutyl trichloroacetate
293.2
7.667
C6H9N
Cyclopentanecarbonitrile
293.2
22.68
0.69830E+02
-0.25303E+00
0.31491E-03
201-293
C6H10
1,5-Hexadiene
294.0
2.125
0.30014E+01
-0.28668E-02
-0.31026E-06
151-294
C6H10
cis,cis-2,4-Hexadiene
297.0
2.163
0.27284E+01
-0.17178E-02
-0.62926E-06
234-351
C6H10
trans,trans-2,4-Hexadiene
297.0
2.123
0.26774E+01
-0.16977E-02
-0.55637E-06
232-353
C6H10
2-Methyl-1,3-pentadiene*
298.2
2.422
C6H10
3-Methyl-1,3-pentadiene
298.2
2.426
C6H10
4-Methyl-1,3-pentadiene
293.2
2.599
0.51328E+01
-0.12774E-01
0.14215E-04
198-323
C6H10
2,3-Dimethyl-1,3-butadiene
293.2
2.102
0.26258E+01
-0.17990E-02
0.12035E-06
223-323
C6H10
1-Hexyne
296.0
2.621
0.58591E+01
-0.17099E-01
0.20856E-04
184-296
C6H10
Cyclohexene
293.2
2.2176
0.30598E+01
-0.39841E-02
0.37554E-05
141-313
C6H10O
Butoxyacetylene
298.2
6.62
C6H10O
Cyclohexanone
293.0
16.1
0.41577E+02
-0.11463E+00
0.92454E-04
253-423
C6H10O
Mesityl oxide
273.2
15.6
C6H10O2
Ethyl 2-butenoate
293.2
5.4
C6H10O2
Ethyl methacrylate
303.2
5.68
0.40962E+02
-0.20520E+00
0.29286E-03
303-343
C6H10O3
Ethyl acetoacetate
293.2
14.0
C6H10O3
Propanoic anhydride
293.2
18.30
C6H10O4
Monomethyl glutarate
293.2
8.37
0.16779E+02
-0.39839E-01
0.38095E-04
293-363
C6H10O4
Diethyl oxalate
293.2
8.266
0.21938E+02
-0.66226E-01
0.66800E-04
293-368
C6H10O4
Dimethyl succinate
293.2
7.19
0.13551E+02
-0.23109E-01
0.55440E-05
293-433
C6H10O4
Ethylene glycol diacetate
290.2
7.7
0.25093E+02
-0.95171E-01
0.12224E-03
223-290
C6H11Br
Bromocyclohexane
303.2
8.0026
C6H11BrO2
Ethyl 2-bromobutanoate
303.2
8.57
0.49005E+02
-0.23193E+00
0.32500E-03
303-333
C6H11BrO2
Ethyl 2-bromo-2-methylpropanoate
303.2
8.55
0.77044E+02
-0.40784E+00
0.60000E-03
303-333
C6H11Cl
Chlorocyclohexane
303.2
7.9505
C6H11N
Hexanenitrile
298.2
17.26
C6H11N
4-Methylpentanenitrile
295.2
17.5
C6H11NO
Cyclohexanone oxime
362.2
3.04
C6H12
1-Hexene
294.0
2.077
0.31476E+01
-0.50003E-02
0.46673E-05
149-294
C6H12
trans-2-Hexene
295.0
1.978
0.24338E+01
-0.11323E-02
-0.13720E-05
157-295
C6H12
cis-3-Hexene
296.0
2.069
0.30691E+01
-0.45458E-02
0.39898E-05
155-296
C6H12
trans-3-Hexene
293.2
1.954
C6H12
Cyclohexane
293.2
2.0243
0.24293E+01
-0.12095E-02
-0.58741E-06
283-333
C6H12
Methylcyclopentane
293.2
1.9853
0.21587E+01
-0.22450E-03
-0.12500E-05
293-323
C6H12
Ethylcyclobutane
293.2
1.965
C6H12Br2
1,6-Dibromohexane
298.2
8.52
-0.55185E+01
0.11746E+00
-0.23658E-03
274-328
C6H12Br2
3,4-Dibromohexane
298.2
6.732
C6H12Cl2
1,6-Dichlorohexane
308.2
8.60
0.11277E+02
0.67200E-02
-0.50000E-04
308-338
C6H12O
1-Methylcyclopentanol
310.1
7.11
0.75444E+02
-0.36617E+00
0.47021E-03
310-333
C6H12O
Isobutyl vinyl ether
293.2
3.34
0.48060E+01
-0.50000E-02
-0.41495E-14
293-323
C6H12O
2-Hexanone
293.2
14.56
0.70378E+02
-0.29385E+00
0.35289E-03
243-293
C6H12O
4-Methyl-2-pentanone
293.2
13.11
0.36341E+02
-0.97119E-01
0.61896E-04
204-373
C6H12O
3,3-Dimethyl-2-butanone
293.2
12.73
0.66857E+02
-0.28552E+00
0.34422E-03
243-293
C6H12O
Cyclohexanol
293.2
16.40
0.10173E+03
-0.43072E+00
0.47926E-03
293-423
C6H12O2
Hexanoic acid
298.2
2.600
0.21730E+01
0.14840E-02
-0.16526E-06
298-433
C6H12O2
2-Ethylbutanoic acid
296.2
2.72
C6H12O2
tert-Butylacetic acid
296.2
2.85
C6H12O2
Pentyl formate
292.2
5.7
C6H12O2
Isopentyl formate
288.2
5.44
0.29257E+02
-0.14028E+00
0.20000E-03
288-323
C6H12O2
Butyl acetate
293.2
5.07
0.13825E+02
-0.43994E-01
0.48214E-04
253-353
C6H12O2
sec-Butyl acetate
293.2
5.135
0.12427E+02
-0.32035E-01
0.24286E-04
273-323
C6H12O2
tert-Butyl acetate
293.2
5.672
0.55435E+02
-0.30494E+00
0.46107E-03
273-323
C6H12O2
Isobutyl acetate
293.2
5.068
0.14323E+02
-0.46048E-01
0.49286E-04
273-323
C6H12O2
Propyl propanoate
293.2
5.249
C6H12O2
Ethyl butanoate
301.2
5.18
0.48698E+02
-0.25660E+00
0.37237E-03
301-343
C6H12O2
Methyl pentanoate
293.2
4.992
C6H12O2
Diacetone alcohol
298.2
18.2
C6H12O3
Ethylene glycol monoethyl
303.2
7.567
0.23290E+02
-0.71566E-01
0.65000E-04
303-323
ether acetate
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K


--- PAGE 1153 ---
TeamLRN
6-164
C6H12S
Cyclohexanethiol
298.2
5.420
C6H13Br
1-Bromohexane
298.2
5.82
0.15233E+02
-0.44385E-01
0.43039E-04
274-328
C6H13Cl
1-Chlorohexane
293.2
6.104
0.15994E+02
-0.43647E-01
0.33393E-04
273-323
C6H13ClO
6-Chloro-1-hexanol
242.2
21.6
-0.73364E+01
0.46377E+00
-0.14202E-02
195-242
C6H13I
1-Iodohexane
293.3
5.35
0.16685E+02
-0.61309E-01
0.77262E-04
293-323
C6H13N
Cyclohexylamine
293.2
4.547
C6H13NO
N-Propylpropanamide
298.2
118.1
0.58846E+03
-0.22012E+01
0.20870E-02
298-328
C6H13NO
N-Butylacetamide
293.2
104.0
0.70739E+03
-0.37369E+01
0.71585E-02
253-493
C6H13NO
N,N-Diethylacetamide
293.2
32.1
C6H14
Hexane
293.2
1.8865
0.19768E+01
0.70933E-03
-0.34470E-05
293-473
C6H14
2-Methylpentane
293.2
1.886
0.20745E+01
0.50871E-03
-0.39286E-05
273-323
C6H14
3-Methylpentane
293.2
1.886
0.24739E+01
-0.23190E-02
0.10714E-05
273-323
C6H14
2,2-Dimethylbutane
293.2
1.869
0.22740E+01
-0.96229E-03
-0.14286E-05
273-313
C6H14
2,3-Dimethylbutane
293.2
1.889
0.24305E+01
-0.20081E-02
0.53571E-06
273-323
C6H14O
1-Hexanol
293.2
13.03
0.62744E+02
-0.24214E+00
0.24704E-03
233-513
C6H14O
2-Hexanol
298.2
11.06
C6H14O
3-Hexanol
298.2
9.66
C6H14O
3-Methyl-1-pentanol
298.2
15.2
C6H14O
3-Methyl-3-pentanol
293.2
4.322
C6H14O
2-Ethyl-1-butanol
362.2
6.19
C6H14O
2,2-Dimethyl-1-butanol
293.2
10.5
0.14054E+03
-0.72925E+00
0.97821E-03
243-393
C6H14O
Dipropyl ether
297.0
3.38
0.14600E+02
-0.72670E-01
0.11742E-03
161-297
C6H14O
Diisopropyl ether
303.2
3.805
C6H14OS
Dipropyl sulfoxide
303.2
30.37
0.84868E+02
-0.23486E+00
0.18198E-03
303-373
C6H14O2
2-Methyl-2,4-pentanediol
293.2
25.86
0.14531E+03
-0.65285E+00
0.83503E-03
203-333
C6H14O2
Ethylene glycol diethyl ether
293.2
3.90
0.99099E+01
-0.33403E-01
0.44048E-04
223-303
C6H14O2S
Dipropyl sulfone
303.2
32.62
0.70195E+02
-0.15008E+00
0.86506E-04
303-398
C6H14O3
1,2,6-Hexanetriol
285.3
31.5
0.26127E+03
-0.14552E+01
0.22765E-02
261-285
C6H14O3
Diethylene glycol dimethyl ether
298.2
7.23
0.28291E+02
-0.11236E+00
0.14000E-03
298-333
C6H14O4
Triethylene glycol
293.2
23.69
0.91845E+02
-0.33827E+00
0.36062E-03
253-333
C6H14O6
D-Glucitol
353.2
35.5
C6H14O6
D-Mannitol
443.2
24.6
C6H14S
1-Hexanethiol
293.2
4.436
0.11774E+02
-0.37298E-01
0.41875E-04
273-333
C6H15B
Triethylborane
293.2
1.974
C6H15N
Hexylamine
293.2
4.08
0.80244E+01
-0.16627E-01
0.10874E-04
253-373
C6H15N
Dipropylamine
293.2
2.923
0.11376E+02
-0.49796E-01
0.71792E-04
243-323
C6H15N
Triethylamine
293.2
2.418
0.29205E+01
-0.14007E-02
-0.13469E-05
233-323
C6H15OP
Triethylphosphine oxide
323.2
35.5
C6H15O4P
Triethyl phosphate
298.2
13.20
0.61230E+02
-0.26047E+00
0.33333E-03
298-333
C6H15PS
Triethylphosphine sulfide
371.2
39.0
C6H16O2Si
Diethoxydimethylsilane
298.2
3.216
C6H16Si
Triethylsilane
293.2
2.323
C6H18N3OP
Hexamethylphosphoric triamide
293.2
31.3
0.95666E+02
-0.29769E+00
0.26407E-03
283-363
C6H18N4
N,N’-Bis(2-aminoethyl)-1,2-
293.2
10.76
0.50699E+02
-0.21730E+00
0.27582E-03
213-333
ethanediamine
C6H18OSi2
Hexamethyldisiloxane
293.2
2.179
0.34537E+01
-0.61530E-02
0.61544E-05
213-313
C6H18O3Si3
Hexamethylcyclotrisiloxane
343.2
2.139
C6H19NSi2
Hexamethyldisilazane
294.2
2.273
0.23358E+01
0.16127E-02
-0.62078E-05
294-333
C7F14
Perfluoromethylcyclohexane
298.2
1.82
C7F16
Perfluoroheptane
289.2
1.847
C7H3Cl5
2,3,4,5,6-Pentachlorotoluene
293.2
4.8
C7H4ClNO
4-Chlorophenyl isocyanate
288.2
3.177
0.40896E+01
-0.31667E-02
288-348
C7H5BrO
Benzoyl bromide
293.2
21.33
0.84231E+02
-0.31089E+00
0.32857E-03
283-313
C7H5ClO
Benzoyl chloride
293.2
23.0
C7H5FO
Benzoyl fluoride
293.2
22.7
C7H5F3
(Trifluoromethyl)benzene
298.2
9.22
C7H5N
Benzonitrile
293.2
25.9
0.57605E+02
-0.13354E+00
0.87767E-04
273-453
C7H5NO
Phenyl isocyanate
293.2
8.940
0.17541E+02
-0.29790E-01
0.15476E-05
293-353
C7H6ClNO2
4-Chloro-3-nitrotoluene
301.2
28.07
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K


--- PAGE 1154 ---
6-165
C7H6Cl2
2,4-Dichlorotoluene
301.2
5.68
C7H6Cl2
2,6-Dichlorotoluene
301.2
3.36
C7H6Cl2
3,4-Dichlorotoluene
301.2
9.39
C7H6Cl2
(Dichloromethyl)benzene
293.2
6.9
C7H6O
Benzaldehyde
293.2
17.85
0.35046E+02
-0.61271E-01
0.16222E-04
301-346
C7H6O2
Salicylaldehyde
293.2
18.35
0.51315E+02
-0.15379E+00
0.14111E-03
289-453
C7H7Br
o-Bromotoluene
293.2
4.641
0.10229E+02
-0.25050E-01
0.20357E-04
273-323
C7H7Br
m-Bromotoluene
293.2
5.566
0.11522E+02
-0.24946E-01
0.15714E-04
273-323
C7H7Br
p-Bromotoluene
293.2
5.503
0.10014E+02
-0.13918E-01
-0.50000E-05
273-293
C7H7Br
(Bromomethyl)benzene
293.2
6.658
0.18482E+02
-0.57207E-01
0.57321E-04
273-323
C7H7BrO
o-Bromoanisole
303.2
8.96
0.12023E+02
-0.59116E-02
-0.13787E-04
303-358
C7H7BrO
p-Bromoanisole
303.2
7.40
0.74367E+01
0.12648E-01
-0.42128E-04
303-358
C7H7Cl
o-Chlorotoluene
293.2
4.721
0.11507E+02
-0.31148E-01
0.27143E-04
273-323
C7H7Cl
m-Chlorotoluene
293.2
5.763
0.13921E+02
-0.37186E-01
0.31786E-04
273-323
C7H7Cl
p-Chlorotoluene
293.2
6.25
0.20265E+01
0.40060E-01
-0.87500E-04
293-333
C7H7Cl
(Chloromethyl)benzene
293.2
6.854
0.17108E+02
-0.45285E-01
0.35000E-04
273-323
C7H7ClO
p-Chloroanisole
293.2
7.84
0.64019E+01
0.30560E-01
-0.87500E-04
293-333
C7H7ClO2S
p-Toluenesulfonyl chloride
343.2
22.6
C7H7ClO3S
4-Methoxybenzenesulfonyl chloride
314.2
27.2
C7H7F
o-Fluorotoluene
298.2
4.23
C7H7F
m-Fluorotoluene
298.2
5.41
C7H7F
p-Fluorotoluene
298.2
5.88
C7H7I
p-Iodotoluene
308.2
4.4
C7H7N
2-Vinylpyridine
293.2
9.126
C7H7N
4-Vinylpyridine
293.2
10.50
C7H7NO2
Benzyl nitrite
298.2
7.78
C7H7NO2
o-Nitrotoluene
293.0
26.26
0.10420E+03
-0.41726E+00
0.51607E-03
273-323
C7H7NO2
m-Nitrotoluene
303.2
24.95
0.62492E+02
-0.16235E+00
0.12844E-03
303-403
C7H7NO2
p-Nitrotoluene
331.2
22.2
C7H7NO2S
4-Nitrothioanisole
346.0
21.7
C7H7NO3
2-Nitroanisole
293.2
45.75
0.16684E+03
-0.58196E+00
0.57382E-03
293-423
C7H7NO3
3-Nitroanisole
318.2
25.7
0.65402E+02
-0.16460E+00
0.12560E-03
318-443
C7H7NO3
4-Nitroanisole
338.2
26.95
0.59811E+02
-0.10955E+00
0.36042E-04
338-443
C7H8
Toluene
296.35
2.379
0.32584E+01
-0.34410E-02
0.15937E-05
207-316
C7H8O
o-Cresol
298.2
6.76
0.21633E+02
-0.71069E-01
0.70590E-04
298-453
C7H8O
m-Cresol
298.2
12.44
0.81716E+02
-0.35039E+00
0.39878E-03
274-463
C7H8O
p-Cresol
298.2
13.05
0.70253E+02
-0.28870E+00
0.31979E-03
298-453
C7H8O
Benzyl alcohol
303.2
11.916
0.13661E+03
-0.72127E+00
0.10225E-02
303-333
C7H8O
Anisole
294.2
4.30
0.10887E+02
-0.32372E-01
0.33629E-04
294-413
C7H8O2
2-Methoxyphenol
298.2
11.95
0.31751E+02
-0.88173E-01
0.72953E-04
291-448
C7H8O2
3-Methoxyphenol
298.2
11.59
0.37279E+02
-0.12113E+00
0.11698E-03
298-433
C7H8O2
4-Methoxyphenol
333.7
11.05
0.39483E+02
-0.12142E+00
0.10841E-03
334-453
C7H8O2S
Ethyl thiophene-2-carboxylate
293.2
6.18
C7H8O2S
Methyl phenyl sulfone
373.2
37.9
C7H8S
Benzenemethanethiol
298.2
4.705
0.16628E+02
-0.68276E-01
0.94636E-04
298-358
C7H8S
4-Methylbenzenethiol
323.2
4.74
0.87052E+01
-0.15347E-01
0.95238E-05
323-358
C7H8S
(Methylthio)benzene
303.2
4.88
0.21841E+02
-0.97630E-01
0.13750E-03
303-343
C7H9N
Benzylamine
293.2
5.18
C7H9N
o-Methylaniline
298.2
6.138
0.10988E+02
-0.18976E-01
0.91958E-05
298-398
C7H9N
m-Methylaniline
298.2
5.816
0.13477E+02
-0.35551E-01
0.33135E-04
298-398
C7H9N
p-Methylaniline
333.2
5.058
0.78897E+01
-0.10196E-01
0.51190E-05
333-403
C7H9N
N-Methylaniline
293.2
5.96
C7H9N
2-Ethylpyridine
293.2
8.33
0.36397E+02
-0.15070E+00
0.18750E-03
293-333
C7H9N
4-Ethylpyridine
293.2
10.98
-0.73831E+01
0.14326E+00
-0.27500E-03
293-333
C7H9N
2,4-Dimethylpyridine
293.2
9.60
0.25895E+02
-0.73900E-01
0.62500E-04
293-333
C7H9N
2,6-Dimethylpyridine
293.2
7.33
0.17714E+02
-0.39080E-01
0.12500E-04
293-333
C7H9NO
2,6-Dimethylpyridine-1-oxide
298.2
46.11
0.22765E+03
-0.90760E+00
0.10011E-02
298-398
C7H9NO
o-Methoxyaniline
303.2
5.230
0.79911E+01
-0.92183E-02
0.37879E-06
303-393
C7H9NO
m-Methoxyaniline
298.2
8.76
0.28179E+02
-0.97840E-01
0.11027E-03
289-393
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K


--- PAGE 1155 ---
TeamLRN
6-166
C7H9NO
p-Methoxyaniline
333.2
7.85
0.30149E+02
-0.10523E+00
0.11467E-03
333-453
C7H10N2
1-Methyl-1-phenylhydrazine
292.2
7.3
C7H11Cl3O2
Isopentyl trichloroacetate
293.2
7.287
C7H12
1,6-Heptadiene
293.0
2.161
0.30815E+01
-0.36095E-02
0.16354E-05
184-293
C7H12
Cycloheptene
295.0
2.265
0.32309E+01
-0.42373E-02
0.32572E-05
227-363
C7H12O
Cycloheptanone
298.2
13.16
0.17511E+03
-0.11221E+01
0.19417E-02
258-298
C7H12O
2-Methylcyclohexanone
293.2
14.0
C7H12O
3-Methylcyclohexanone
293.2
12.4
C7H12O
4-Methylcyclohexanone
293.2
12.35
C7H12O2
Cyclohexanecarboxylic acid
304.2
2.67
C7H12O2
Cyclohexyl formate
293.2
6.47
C7H12O2
Butyl acrylate
301.2
5.25
0.38296E+02
-0.19109E+00
0.27006E-03
301-343
C7H12O4
Monomethyl adipate
293.2
6.69
0.11962E+02
-0.23973E-01
0.20608E-04
293-433
C7H12O4
Diethyl malonate
304.2
7.550
0.14809E+02
-0.31207E-01
0.24066E-04
304-393
C7H12O4
Dimethyl glutarate
293.2
7.87
0.20697E+02
-0.57794E-01
0.48405E-04
293-433
C7H12O5
1,2,3-Propanetriol-1,3-diacetate
288.2
9.80
0.28321E+02
-0.89073E-01
0.86891E-04
258-374
C7H14
1-Heptene
293.2
2.092
0.21755E+01
0.13896E-02
-0.57049E-05
273-323
C7H14
2-Methyl-2-hexene
293.2
2.962
C7H14
3-Ethyl-2-pentene
293.2
2.051
C7H14
Cycloheptane
293.2
2.0784
0.25136E+01
-0.15089E-02
0.84915E-07
278-333
C7H14
Methylcyclohexane
293.2
2.024
C7H14Br2
1,2-Dibromoheptane
298.2
3.77
C7H14Br2
2,3-Dibromoheptane
298.2
5.08
C7H14Br2
3,4-Dibromoheptane
298.2
4.70
C7H14Cl2
1,7-Dichloroheptane
298.2
8.34
C7H14O
1-Heptanal
295.2
9.07
C7H14O
2-Heptanone
293.2
11.95
0.38348E+02
-0.12531E+00
0.12005E-03
253-413
C7H14O
3-Heptanone
293.2
12.7
C7H14O
4-Heptanone
293.2
12.60
0.41520E+02
-0.13839E+00
0.13497E-03
253-393
C7H14O
5-Methyl-2-hexanone
293.2
13.53
0.52353E+02
-0.17695E+00
0.15195E-03
293-333
C7H14O
Cyclohexanemethanol
333.2
9.70
0.10164E+03
-0.45839E+00
0.54762E-03
333-368
C7H14O
2-Methylcyclohexanol*
293.2
9.375
0.17315E+03
-0.98794E+00
0.14634E-02
273-323
C7H14O
3-Methylcyclohexanol*
293.2
13.79
0.65896E+02
-0.21954E+00
0.14107E-03
273-323
C7H14O
4-Methylcyclohexanol*
293.2
13.45
0.65021E+02
-0.22896E+00
0.17946E-03
273-323
C7H14O2
Heptanoic acid
288.2
3.04
0.36423E+01
-0.31996E-02
0.39362E-05
288-423
C7H14O2
Pentyl acetate
293.2
4.79
0.12091E+02
-0.36536E-01
0.39732E-04
253-353
C7H14O2
Isopentyl acetate
293.2
4.72
C7H14O2
Butyl propanoate
293.2
4.838
C7H14O2
Propyl butanoate
293.2
4.3
C7H14O2
Ethyl pentanoate
291.2
4.71
C7H14O2
Ethyl 3-methylbutanoate
293.2
4.71
C7H14O2
Methyl hexanoate
293.2
4.615
C7H15Br
1-Bromoheptane
303.2
5.255
0.15289E+02
-0.50621E-01
0.57753E-04
203-343
C7H15Br
2-Bromoheptane
295.2
6.46
C7H15Br
4-Bromoheptane
295.2
6.81
C7H15Cl
1-Chloroheptane
293.2
5.521
0.14279E+02
-0.39431E-01
0.32321E-04
273-323
C7H15Cl
2-Chloroheptane
295.2
6.52
C7H15Cl
3-Chloroheptane
295.2
6.70
C7H15Cl
4-Chloroheptane
295.2
6.54
C7H15I
1-Iodoheptane
298.2
4.92
0.11856E+02
-0.33493E-01
0.34368E-04
294-323
C7H15I
3-Iodoheptane
295.2
6.39
C7H16
Heptane
293.2
1.9209
0.24740E+01
-0.22577E-02
0.12428E-05
273-373
C7H16
2-Methylhexane
293.2
1.9221
0.24759E+01
-0.22535E-02
0.12500E-05
293-323
C7H16
3-Methylhexane
293.2
1.920
0.27089E+01
-0.37908E-02
0.37500E-05
273-323
C7H16
3-Ethylpentane
293.2
1.942
0.23771E+01
-0.15140E-02
0.10093E-06
163-363
C7H16
2,2-Dimethylpentane
293.2
1.915
0.23414E+01
-0.14362E-02
-0.51322E-07
153-353
C7H16
2,3-Dimethylpentane
293.2
1.929
0.25637E+01
-0.26328E-02
0.16071E-05
273-323
C7H16
2,4-Dimethylpentane
293.2
1.902
0.23979E+01
-0.17436E-02
0.17857E-06
273-323
C7H16
3,3-Dimethylpentane
291.3
1.9419
0.24007E+01
-0.16802E-02
0.36069E-06
291-322
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K


--- PAGE 1156 ---
6-167
C7H16
2,2,3-Trimethylbutane
293.2
1.930
C7H16O
1-Heptanol
293.2
11.75
0.60662E+02
-0.24049E+00
0.25155E-03
239-513
C7H16O
2-Heptanol
293.7
9.72
0.10050E+03
-0.49793E+00
0.64504E-03
207-365
C7H16O
3-Heptanol
296.1
7.07
0.19586E+03
-0.11465E+01
0.17175E-02
248-349
C7H16O
4-Heptanol
296.2
6.18
0.28995E+03
-0.18499E+01
0.30109E-02
270-301
C7H16O
2-Methyl-2-hexanol
297.0
3.257
C7H16O
3-Methyl-2-hexanol
297.2
4.990
0.59724E+02
-0.32417E+00
0.47058E-03
244-372
C7H16O
3-Methyl-3-hexanol
298.2
3.248
C7H16O
3-Ethyl-3-pentanol
293.2
3.158
C7H16O
2,2-Dimethyl-1-pentanol
293.2
6.020
0.37318E+02
-0.17095E+00
0.22022E-03
283-393
C7H16O
Ethyl pentyl ether
296.2
3.6
C7H16O
Ethyl isopentyl ether
293.2
3.955
0.66541E+01
-0.55450E-02
-0.12500E-04
293-323
C7H16O3
Triethoxymethane
293.2
4.779
C7H16S
1-Heptanethiol
293.2
4.194
0.71333E+01
-0.97320E-02
-0.12500E-05
273-333
C7H17N
Heptylamine
293.2
3.81
0.87794E+01
-0.24363E-01
0.25325E-04
253-373
C7H18O3Si
Triethoxymethylsilane
298.2
3.845
C8H4F6
1,3-Bis(trifluoromethyl)benzene
303.2
5.98
C8H6
Phenylacetylene
298.2
2.98
C8H6Cl2
2,5-Dichlorostyrene
298.2
2.58
C8H6Cl4
1,2,3,4-Tetrachloro-5,6-
293.2
8.0
dimethylbenzene
C8H6Cl4
1,2,3,5-Tetrachloro-4,6-
293.2
5.4
dimethylbenzene
C8H6O
Phenoxyacetylene
298.2
4.76
C8H7N
Benzeneacetonitrile
299.2
17.87
0.82175E+02
-0.37416E+00
0.53220E-03
299-343
C8H7NO2
4-Methoxyphenyl isocyanate
333.2
10.26
0.20780E+02
-0.31571E-01
333-403
C8H7NO4
Methyl 2-nitrobenzoate
300.1
27.76
C8H8
Styrene
293.2
2.4737
0.44473E+01
-0.11422E-01
0.16000E-04
293-313
C8H8O
Acetophenone
298.2
17.44
0.26099E+02
0.64048E-02
-0.11905E-03
298-333
C8H8O2
Benzeneacetic acid
353.2
3.47
0.24104E+01
0.30000E-02
353-393
C8H8O2
Benzyl formate
303.2
6.34
0.26162E+02
-0.11026E+00
0.14787E-03
303-358
C8H8O2
Phenyl acetate
298.2
5.403
0.11327E+02
-0.26707E-01
0.22938E-04
298-404
C8H8O2
Methyl benzoate
302.7
6.642
0.17486E+02
-0.51027E-01
0.50222E-04
303-393
C8H8O2
(Hydroxyacetyl)benzene
298.2
21.33
0.42286E+02
-0.69215E-01
-0.35714E-05
298-368
C8H8O2
4-Methoxybenzaldehyde
303.2
22.0
C8H8O3
Methyl salicylate
314.4
8.80
0.20501E+02
-0.39045E-01
0.68298E-05
223-398
C8H9Br
1-Bromo-2-ethylbenzene
298.2
5.55
C8H9Br
1-Bromo-3-ethylbenzene
298.2
5.56
C8H9Br
1-Bromo-4-ethylbenzene
298.2
5.42
C8H9BrO
1-Bromo-2-ethoxybenzene
313.2
7.04
0.23146E+02
-0.75753E-01
0.77778E-04
313-358
C8H9Cl
1-Chloro-2-ethylbenzene
298.2
4.36
C8H9Cl
1-Chloro-3-ethylbenzene
298.2
5.18
C8H9Cl
1-Chloro-4-ethylbenzene
298.2
5.16
C8H9NO2
1-Ethyl-2-nitrobenzene
273.4
21.9
C8H9NO2
Methyl 2-aminobenzoate
298.2
21.9
C8H9NO2
Ethyl 4-pyridinecarboxylate
293.2
8.95
C8H10
Ethylbenzene
293.2
2.4463
0.35969E+01
-0.53169E-02
0.47500E-05
293-323
C8H10
o-Xylene
293.2
2.562
0.36163E+01
-0.40177E-02
0.14286E-05
273-323
C8H10
m-Xylene
293.2
2.359
0.28421E+01
-0.10191E-02
-0.21429E-05
273-323
C8H10
p-Xylene
293.2
2.2735
0.23140E+01
0.97221E-03
-0.37500E-05
293-363
C8H10O
2,3-Xylenol
343.2
4.81
0.14399E+02
-0.41438E-01
0.39244E-04
343-433
C8H10O
2,4-Xylenol
303.2
5.060
0.22125E+02
-0.85543E-01
0.96548E-04
303-363
C8H10O
2,5-Xylenol
338.2
5.36
0.18049E+02
-0.54991E-01
0.51656E-04
338-455
C8H10O
2,6-Xylenol
313.2
4.90
0.12284E+02
-0.32996E-01
0.29867E-04
313-453
C8H10O
3,4-Xylenol
333.2
9.02
0.54423E+02
-0.21153E+00
0.22508E-03
333-453
C8H10O
3,5-Xylenol
323.2
9.06
0.54251E+02
-0.21647E+00
0.23542E-03
323-453
C8H10O
Benzeneethanol
293.2
12.31
0.12170E+03
-0.63124E+00
0.87776E-03
278-333
C8H10O
1-Phenylethanol
293.2
8.77
0.32971E+02
-0.12042E+00
0.12809E-03
293-423
C8H10O
Phenetole
293.2
4.216
-0.15043E+02
0.13752E+00
-0.24500E-03
293-313
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K


--- PAGE 1157 ---
TeamLRN
6-168
C8H10O
2-Methylanisole
293.2
3.502
0.50825E+01
-0.62297E-02
0.28571E-05
293-333
C8H10O
3-Methylanisole
293.2
3.967
0.12830E+02
-0.49701E-01
0.66429E-04
293-333
C8H10O
4-Methylanisole
293.2
3.914
0.86608E+01
-0.23510E-01
0.25000E-04
293-333
C8H10O2
1,2-Dimethoxybenzene
293.2
4.45
0.74604E+01
-0.13445E-01
0.10737E-04
293-443
C8H10O2
1,3-Dimethoxybenzene
298.2
5.363
0.11911E+02
-0.30804E-01
0.29643E-04
298-358
C8H10O2
1,4-Dimethoxybenzene
333.7
5.60
0.11289E+02
-0.20765E-01
0.11987E-04
334-463
C8H10O2S
Ethyl phenyl sulfone
348.2
39.0
C8H10S
(Ethylthio)benzene
298.2
4.95
C8H11N
p-Ethylaniline
298.2
4.84
C8H11N
N-Ethylaniline
293.2
5.87
C8H11N
N,N-Dimethylaniline
298.2
4.90
0.84052E+01
-0.13549E-01
0.62835E-05
289-453
C8H11N
2,4,6-Trimethylpyridine
298.2
7.807
0.20990E+02
-0.57419E-01
0.44286E-04
298-358
C8H11NO
4-Ethoxyaniline
298.2
7.43
C8H12N2O2
Hexamethylene diisocyanate
288.2
14.41
0.26715E+02
-0.42696E-01
288-403
C8H12O4
Diethyl maleate
298.2
7.560
0.13953E+02
-0.21969E-01
0.17817E-05
298-343
C8H12O4
Diethyl fumarate
296.2
6.56
C8H14
1,7-Octadiene
293.0
2.186
0.28376E+01
-0.17442E-02
-0.16141E-05
214-293
C8H14
cis-Cyclooctene
296.0
2.306
0.31115E+01
-0.32058E-02
0.16713E-05
269-406
C8H14
1,2-Dimethylcyclohexene
296.0
2.144
0.26443E+01
-0.17973E-02
0.35815E-06
211-374
C8H14
1,3-Dimethylcyclohexene
296.0
2.182
0.29951E+01
-0.34615E-02
0.24026E-05
213-373
C8H14O2
Methyl cyclohexanecarboxylate
293.2
4.87
C8H14O2
Cyclohexyl acetate
293.2
5.08
C8H14O3
Butanoic anhydride
293.2
12.8
C8H14O3
2-Methylpropanoic anhydride
292.2
13.6
C8H14O4
Diisopropyl oxalate
293.2
6.403
0.10709E+02
-0.16328E-01
0.56000E-05
293-368
C8H14O4
Diethyl succinate
293.2
6.098
0.80213E+01
0.11810E-02
-0.26400E-04
293-343
C8H14O4
Dimethyl adipate
293.2
6.84
0.11739E+02
-0.17281E-01
0.11447E-05
293-433
C8H15N
Octanenitrile
293.2
13.90
C8H16
1-Octene
293.2
2.113
0.24348E+01
0.34200E-03
-0.50000E-05
273-323
C8H16
cis-3-Octene
298.2
2.062
C8H16
trans-3-Octene
298.2
2.002
C8H16
cis-4-Octene
298.2
2.053
C8H16
trans-4-Octene
298.2
2.004
C8H16
3-Methyl-2-heptene*
293.2
2.436
C8H16
2,5-Dimethyl-2-hexene
293.2
2.431
C8H16
2,4,4-Trimethyl-1-pentene
298.2
2.0908
C8H16
Cyclooctane
295.0
2.116
0.25036E+01
-0.12460E-02
-0.23175E-06
295-411
C8H16Br2
1,8-Dibromooctane
298.2
7.43
0.94117E+00
0.61520E-01
-0.13333E-03
298-328
C8H16Cl2
1,8-Dichlorooctane
298.2
7.64
C8H16O
2-Octanone
293.2
9.51
-0.16219E+02
0.18799E+00
-0.34156E-03
293-333
C8H16O
3-Octanone
303.2
10.50
C8H16O2
Octanoic acid
288.2
2.85
0.29391E+01
-0.38721E-03
288-423
C8H16O2
2-Ethylhexanoic acid
296.2
2.64
C8H16O2
Hexyl acetate
293.2
4.42
C8H16O2
Pentyl propanoate
293.2
4.552
C8H16O2
Isopentyl propanoate
273.2
5.21
0.17665E+02
-0.71718E-01
0.95635E-04
273-373
C8H16O2
Butyl butanoate
298.2
4.39
0.79684E+01
-0.12000E-01
0.15266E-13
298-318
C8H16O2
Propyl pentanoate
292.2
4.0
C8H16O2
Ethyl hexanoate
293.2
4.45
0.11007E+02
-0.32800E-01
0.35714E-04
253-353
C8H16O2
Methyl heptanoate
293.2
4.355
C8H16O3
Isopentyl lactate
273.2
11.2
0.48649E+02
-0.21253E+00
0.27619E-03
273-373
C8H17Br
1-Bromooctane
293.2
5.0957
0.12404E+02
-0.35050E-01
0.34542E-04
283-353
C8H17Br
2-Bromooctane
293.2
5.44
C8H17Cl
1-Chlorooctane
298.2
5.05
0.11346E+02
-0.25120E-01
0.13450E-04
274-328
C8H17Cl
2-Chlorooctane
293.2
5.42
C8H17F
1-Fluorooctane
293.2
3.89
C8H17I
1-Iodooctane
293.2
4.67
0.12452E+02
-0.41229E-01
0.50108E-04
233-313
C8H17NO2
1-Nitrooctane
293.2
11.46
C8H18
Octane
293.2
1.948
0.22590E+01
-0.84212E-03
-0.75758E-06
233-393
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K


--- PAGE 1158 ---
6-169
C8H18
2-Methylheptane
293.2
1.9519
C8H18
3-Ethylhexane
293.2
1.9617
C8H18
2,2-Dimethylhexane
293.2
1.9498
C8H18
2,5-Dimethylhexane
293.95
1.9619
0.25821E+01
-0.26804E-02
0.19404E-05
294-324
C8H18
3,3-Dimethylhexane
293.2
1.9645
C8H18
3,4-Dimethylhexane
292.1
1.9814
0.26849E+01
-0.33712E-02
0.32949E-05
292-324
C8H18
3-Ethyl-3-methylpentane
291.49
1.9869
0.25983E+01
-0.28027E-02
0.24195E-05
292-324
C8H18
2,2,3-Trimethylpentane
293.2
1.960
C8H18
2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
293.2
1.943
0.23677E+01
-0.14768E-02
0.94261E-07
173-373
C8H18
2,3,3-Trimethylpentane
293.2
1.9780
C8H18
2,3,4-Trimethylpentane
293.2
1.9738
C8H18O
1-Octanol
293.2
10.30
0.51647E+02
-0.20371E+00
0.21320E-03
258-513
C8H18O
2-Octanol
293.2
8.13
0.63760E+02
-0.27643E+00
0.31075E-03
213-513
C8H18O
3-Octanol
293.2
5.55
0.12505E+03
-0.70646E+00
0.10245E-02
223-383
C8H18O
4-Octanol
293.2
4.48
0.51049E+02
-0.26664E+00
0.37280E-03
243-403
C8H18O
2-Methyl-1-heptanol
293.1
5.16
0.61698E+02
-0.33647E+00
0.49066E-03
236-328
C8H18O
3-Methyl-1-heptanol
290.3
2.884
0.84687E+01
-0.33712E-01
0.49793E-04
241-316
C8H18O
4-Methyl-1-heptanol
290.6
4.63
0.48612E+02
-0.26773E+00
0.39972E-03
237-332
C8H18O
5-Methyl-1-heptanol
290.4
7.68
0.54581E+02
-0.24772E+00
0.29734E-03
235-328
C8H18O
6-Methyl-1-heptanol
290.3
10.54
0.57997E+02
-0.23517E+00
0.24663E-03
265-328
C8H18O
2-Methyl-2-heptanol
292.2
3.43
C8H18O
3-Methyl-2-heptanol
289.6
7.47
0.39178E+02
-0.17976E+00
0.24218E-03
229-329
C8H18O
4-Methyl-2-heptanol
290.0
3.59
0.39715E+02
-0.23115E+00
0.36771E-03
240-333
C8H18O
5-Methyl-2-heptanol
278.5
7.5
0.68568E+02
-0.40706E+00
0.67433E-03
230-279
C8H18O
6-Methyl-2-heptanol
290.1
6.41
0.77520E+02
-0.41724E+00
0.59448E-03
239-329
C8H18O
2-Methyl-3-heptanol
293.2
3.260
-0.59739E+01
0.56700E-01
-0.83125E-04
343-403
C8H18O
3-Methyl-3-heptanol
293.2
3.013
-0.38440E+01
0.42327E-01
-0.61250E-04
343-403
C8H18O
4-Methyl-3-heptanol
293.2
3.312
-0.48003E+01
0.50740E-01
-0.75000E-04
343-403
C8H18O
5-Methyl-3-heptanol
293.2
3.832
0.61967E+01
-0.63750E-02
343-383
C8H18O
6-Methyl-3-heptanol
293.2
4.992
0.23037E+02
-0.98029E-01
0.12479E-03
283-383
C8H18O
2-Methyl-4-heptanol
296.3
3.338
0.42102E+00
0.10427E-01
-0.20438E-05
230-333
C8H18O
3-Methyl-4-heptanol
290.0
7.46
0.33354E+02
-0.14077E+00
0.17750E-03
230-330
C8H18O
4-Methyl-4-heptanol
296.2
2.902
C8H18O
2-Ethyl-1-hexanol
298.2
7.58
0.86074E+02
-0.42636E+00
0.55078E-03
208-318
C8H18O
2,2-Dimethyl-1-hexanol
293.2
4.50
0.91244E+01
-0.21785E-01
0.21018E-04
283-393
C8H18O
Dibutyl ether
293.2
3.0830
0.65383E+01
-0.16172E-01
0.14969E-04
293-314
C8H18OS
Dibutyl sulfoxide
313.2
24.73
0.67156E+02
-0.16448E+00
0.92275E-04
313-393
C8H18O2
2-Ethyl-1,3-hexanediol
293.2
18.73
0.57919E+02
-0.17128E+00
0.12949E-03
233-333
C8H18O2S
Dibutyl sulfone
323.2
25.72
0.66248E+02
-0.16417E+00
0.12001E-03
323-398
C8H18O4
Triethylene glycol dimethyl ether
298.2
7.62
C8H18O5
Tetraethylene glycol
293.2
20.44
0.83547E+02
-0.31691E+00
0.34689E-03
253-333
C8H18S
1-Octanethiol
293.2
3.949
0.63667E+01
-0.87920E-02
0.18750E-05
273-333
C8H18S
Dibutyl sulfide
298.2
4.29
C8H19N
Octylamine
293.2
3.58
0.77931E+01
-0.20015E-01
0.19347E-04
273-373
C8H19N
Dibutylamine
293.2
2.765
0.52504E+01
-0.10538E-01
0.71485E-05
243-323
C8H20O4Si
Ethyl silicate
293.2
2.50
C8H20Si
Tetraethylsilane
293.2
2.090
C8H20Sn
Tetraethylstannane
293.2
2.241
C8H23N5
Tetraethylenepentamine
293.2
9.40
0.40553E+02
-0.16681E+00
0.20659E-03
213-333
C8H24O4Si4
Octamethylcyclotetrasiloxane
296.2
2.390
0.36286E+01
-0.56885E-02
0.50874E-05
296-333
C9H6N2O2
Toluene-2,4-diisocyanate
293.2
8.433
0.22174E+02
-0.66982E-01
0.68571E-04
293-353
C9H6O2
2H-1-Benzopyran-2-one
343.2
34.04
0.11311E+03
-0.33804E+00
0.31324E-03
343-423
C9H7N
Quinoline
293.2
9.16
0.33432E+02
-0.13497E+00
0.17788E-03
258-323
C9H7N
Isoquinoline
298.2
11.0
0.14412E+03
-0.79935E+00
0.11839E-02
298-323
C9H8O
Cinnamaldehyde
305.8
17.72
0.41837E+02
-0.11060E+00
0.10401E-03
306-354
C9H8O4
2-(Acetyloxy)benzoic acid
333.2
6.55
0.69994E+01
-0.14553E-02
333-416
C9H10
1-Propenylbenzene
293.2
2.73
C9H10
Allylbenzene
293.2
2.63
C9H10
Isopropenylbenzene
293.2
2.28
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K


--- PAGE 1159 ---
TeamLRN
6-170
C9H10OS
4-Acetylthioanisole
355.2
11.34
C9H10O2
Ethyl benzoate
293.2
6.20
0.18216E+02
-0.62361E-01
0.72884E-04
288-343
C9H10O2
Methyl 4-methylbenzoate
306.2
4.3
C9H10O2
Benzyl acetate
303.2
5.34
0.11727E+02
-0.30869E-01
0.32340E-04
303-358
C9H10O2
Phenyl propanoate
293.2
4.77
C9H10O2
4-Acetylanisole
313.2
17.3
C9H10O3
Ethyl salicylate
308.2
8.48
0.18910E+02
-0.35623E-01
0.46529E-05
225-321
C9H10O3
Methyl 2-methoxybenzoate
294.2
7.7
C9H11Br
(3-Bromopropyl)benzene
302.2
5.41
0.11360E+02
-0.27471E-01
0.25775E-04
302-358
C9H11NO
N-Ethylbenzamide
352.7
42.6
-0.20109E+03
0.17866E+01
-0.31065E-02
353-389
C9H11NO
N,N-Dimethylbenzamide
318.2
20.77
0.76725E+02
-0.26908E+00
0.29409E-03
318-443
C9H11NO2
Ethyl 2-aminobenzoate
298.2
4.14
C9H12
Propylbenzene
293.2
2.370
0.26933E+01
0.21679E-03
-0.44643E-05
273-323
C9H12
Isopropylbenzene
293.2
2.381
0.31149E+01
-0.30801E-02
0.19643E-05
273-323
C9H12
o-Ethyltoluene
293.2
2.595
C9H12
m-Ethyltoluene
293.2
2.365
C9H12
p-Ethyltoluene
293.2
2.265
C9H12
1,2,3-Trimethylbenzene
293.2
2.656
0.76006E+01
-0.29118E-01
0.41786E-04
273-323
C9H12
1,2,4-Trimethylbenzene
293.2
2.377
0.31517E+01
-0.30634E-02
0.14286E-05
273-323
C9H12
1,3,5-Trimethylbenzene
293.2
2.279
0.38998E+01
-0.88072E-02
0.11149E-04
288-358
C9H12O
Benzenepropanol
293.2
11.97
0.94482E+02
-0.45540E+00
0.59307E-03
213-303
C9H12O
α-Ethylbenzenemethanol
293.2
6.68
0.44520E+02
-0.21505E+00
0.29443E-03
233-373
C9H12O
α,α-Dimethylbenzenemethanol
303.2
5.61
0.57072E+01
0.86568E-02
-0.29580E-04
303-373
C9H12O
1-Phenyl-2-propanol
293.2
9.35
0.10762E+03
-0.56026E+00
0.76915E-03
233-373
C9H12O
Benzyl ethyl ether
298.2
3.90
C9H12O
2,6-Dimethylanisole
293.2
3.780
0.76700E+01
-0.18298E-01
0.17143E-04
293-333
C9H12O
3,5-Dimethylanisole
293.2
3.711
0.54981E+01
-0.56651E-02
-0.14286E-05
293-333
C9H12O2S
Butyl thiophene-2-carboxylate
293.2
6.40
C9H12S
Benzenepropanethiol
303.2
4.36
0.82411E+01
-0.15034E-01
0.73617E-05
303-358
C9H13N
Benzylethylamine
293.2
4.3
C9H13N
N-Propylaniline
293.2
5.48
C9H13N
2-Methyl-N,N-dimethylaniline
293.2
3.4
C9H13N
4-Methyl-N,N-dimethylaniline
293.2
3.9
C9H14OSi
Trimethylphenoxysilane
298.2
3.3953
C9H14O6
Triacetin
293.6
7.11
0.17819E+02
-0.53656E-01
0.57759E-04
219-304
C9H14Si
Trimethylphenylsilane
298.2
2.3533
0.21463E+01
0.32711E-02
-0.86264E-05
288-323
C9H16O2
2-Nonenoic acid
296.2
2.5
C9H16O2
Cyclohexyl propanoate
293.2
4.82
C9H16O2
Ethyl cyclohexanecarboxylate
293.2
4.64
C9H16O4
Diethyl glutarate
303.2
6.659
C9H17N
Nonanenitrile
293.2
12.08
C9H18
1-Nonene
293.2
2.180
0.22710E+01
0.15797E-02
-0.64286E-05
273-323
C9H18Br2
1,9-Dibromononane
293.2
7.153
0.18931E+02
-0.57764E-01
0.60000E-04
293-343
C9H18O
2-Nonanone
295.2
9.14
C9H18O
5-Nonanone
293.2
10.6
C9H18O
Di-tert-butyl ketone
287.65
10.0
C9H18O
2,6-Dimethyl-4-heptanone
293.2
9.91
0.33178E+02
-0.11290E+00
0.11454E-03
273-393
C9H18O2
Nonanoic acid
294.9
2.475
0.25039E+01
0.67274E-03
-0.24180E-05
295-365
C9H18O2
2-Methyloctanoic acid
293.2
2.39
C9H18O2
2-Ethylheptanoic acid
293.2
1.98
C9H18O2
Heptyl acetate
293.2
4.2
C9H18O2
Pentyl butanoate
301.2
4.08
0.59029E+01
-0.49905E-02
-0.34292E-05
301-343
C9H18O2
Isopentyl butanoate
293.2
4.0
C9H18O2
Isobutyl pentanoate
292.2
3.8
C9H18O2
Methyl octanoate
293.2
4.101
C9H19Br
1-Bromononane
298.2
4.74
0.79870E+01
-0.10488E-01
-0.13450E-05
274-328
C9H19Cl
1-Chlorononane
293.2
4.803
0.95528E+01
-0.16200E-01
-0.16365E-13
293-323
C9H19NO
N,N-Dibutylformamide
293.2
18.4
C9H20
Nonane
293.2
1.9722
0.23894E+01
-0.14830E-02
0.14881E-06
253-393
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K


--- PAGE 1160 ---
6-171
C9H20
2-Methyloctane
293.2
1.967
C9H20
4-Methyloctane
293.2
1.967
C9H20
2,4-Dimethylheptane
293.2
1.89
C9H20
2,5-Dimethylheptane
293.2
1.89
C9H20
2,6-Dimethylheptane
293.2
1.987
C9H20N2O
Tetraethylurea
296.8
14.29
0.52820E+02
-0.18790E+00
0.19580E-03
205-411
C9H20O
1-Nonanol
293.2
8.83
0.97467E+02
-0.51103E+00
0.71429E-03
288-343
C9H20O
2-Nonanol
298.2
6.66
0.10136E+03
-0.55612E+00
0.80000E-03
288-308
C9H20O
3-Nonanol
298.2
4.49
0.55214E+02
-0.31920E+00
0.50000E-03
288-308
C9H20O
4-Nonanol
298.2
3.69
0.27954E+01
0.30000E-02
-0.52375E-13
288-308
C9H20O
5-Nonanol
298.2
3.54
-0.25463E+01
0.35320E-01
-0.50000E-04
288-308
C9H21B
Tripropylborane
293.2
2.026
C9H21N
Nonylamine
293.2
3.42
0.53575E+01
-0.71982E-02
0.19481E-05
293-373
C9H21N
Tripropylamine
293.2
2.380
0.33380E+01
-0.86332E-02
0.18322E-04
243-293
C9H21O4P
Tripropyl phosphate
293.2
10.93
0.33166E+02
-0.10514E+00
0.10000E-03
293-373
C10H7Br
1-Bromonaphthalene
298.2
4.768
0.10561E+02
-0.27671E-01
0.27655E-04
293-323
C10H7Cl
1-Chloronaphthalene
298.2
5.04
0.84861E+01
-0.12357E-01
0.26899E-05
274-328
C10H7NO2
1-Nitronaphthalene
333.2
19.68
0.36267E+02
-0.41283E-01
-0.25595E-04
333-403
C10H8
Naphthalene
363.2
2.54
C10H8O
1-Naphthol
373.0
5.03
0.16489E+02
-0.46700E-01
0.42857E-04
373-453
C10H8O
2-Naphthol
413.0
4.95
0.92865E+01
-0.10500E-01
0.42501E-15
413-453
C10H9N
1-Naphthylamine
333.2
5.20
0.10577E+02
-0.22114E-01
0.17857E-04
333-453
C10H9N
2-Naphthylamine
393.0
5.26
0.19722E+02
-0.60679E-01
0.60714E-04
393-473
C10H9N
2-Methylquinoline
293.2
7.24
0.11688E+02
-0.78400E-02
-0.25000E-04
293-333
C10H9N
4-Methylquinoline
293.2
9.31
0.17788E+02
-0.32580E-01
0.12500E-04
293-333
C10H9N
6-Methylquinoline
293.2
8.48
0.21696E+02
-0.63400E-01
0.62500E-04
293-333
C10H9N
8-Methylquinoline
293.2
6.58
0.19356E+02
-0.61900E-01
0.62500E-04
293-333
C10H10O4
Methyl 2-(acetyloxy)benzoate
328.9
5.31
0.19579E+02
-0.69970E-01
0.80889E-04
329-371
C10H10O4
Dimethyl phthalate
293.2
8.66
C10H12
1,2,3,4-Tetrahydronaphthalene
298.2
2.771
0.29172E+01
0.12832E-02
-0.59453E-05
298-343
C10H12
4-Ethylstyrene
298.2
3.350
C10H12
Dicyclopentadiene
313.2
2.43
0.30564E+01
-0.20000E-02
0.82443E-15
313-373
C10H12O
Tetrahydro-2-naphthol*
293.2
11.70
0.98978E+02
-0.48267E+00
0.63008E-03
293-363
C10H12O
4-Isopropylbenzaldehyde
288.2
10.68
C10H12O2
4-Allyl-2-methoxyphenol
293.2
9.55
0.52377E+02
-0.24380E+00
0.33333E-03
273-323
C10H12O2
2-Phenylethyl acetate
297.2
4.93
C10H12O2
Benzyl propanoate
303.0
5.11
0.42301E+01
0.13962E-01
-0.36426E-04
303-358
C10H12O2
Phenyl butanoate
293.2
4.48
C10H12O2
Propyl benzoate
303.2
5.78
0.10927E+02
-0.20535E-01
0.11745E-04
303-358
C10H12O2
Ethyl phenylacetate
293.2
5.320
C10H14
Butylbenzene
293.2
2.359
C10H14
sec-Butylbenzene
293.2
2.357
0.28348E+01
-0.68586E-03
-0.32143E-05
273-323
C10H14
tert-Butylbenzene
293.2
2.359
0.27924E+01
-0.38350E-03
-0.37500E-05
273-323
C10H14
Isobutylbenzene
293.2
2.318
0.28055E+01
-0.92614E-03
-0.25000E-05
273-323
C10H14
1-Isopropyl-4-methylbenzene
298.2
2.2322
0.25266E+01
-0.25121E-03
-0.24867E-05
277-333
C10H14
o-Diethylbenzene
293.2
2.594
C10H14
m-Diethylbenzene
293.2
2.369
C10H14
p-Diethylbenzene
293.2
2.259
C10H14
1-Ethyl-3,5-dimethylbenzene
293.2
2.275
C10H14
1,2,3,4-Tetramethylbenzene
296.0
2.538
0.33822E+01
-0.33630E-02
0.17475E-05
273-412
C10H14
1,2,4,5-Tetramethylbenzene
356.0
2.223
0.26834E+01
-0.10327E-02
-0.73533E-06
356-430
C10H14N2
L-Nicotine
293.2
8.937
0.21347E+02
-0.57177E-01
0.50655E-04
293-363
C10H14O
1-Phenyl-2-methyl-2-propanol
298.2
5.71
0.21922E+02
-0.84231E-01
0.99475E-04
298-423
C10H14O
Butyl phenyl ether
293.2
3.734
C10H14O
Thymol
333.2
4.259
C10H15N
N,N-Diethylaniline
303.2
5.15
0.50773E+01
0.15399E-01
-0.50000E-04
303-328
C10H16
γ-Terpinene
298.2
2.2738
C10H16
d-Limonene
298.2
2.3746
C10H16
l-Limonene
298.2
2.3738
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K


--- PAGE 1161 ---
TeamLRN
6-172
C10H16
Terpinolene
298.2
2.2918
C10H16
α-Pinene
298.2
2.1787
C10H16
β-Pinene
298.2
2.4970
C10H16
α-Terpinene
298.2
2.4526
C10H16
β-Myrcene
298.2
2.3
C10H16O
Carvenone
293.2
18.8
C10H16O
d-Fenchone
294.2
12.8
C10H17Cl
2-Chlorobornane
368.2
5.21
C10H18
Pinane
298.2
2.1456
C10H18
cis-Decahydronaphthalene
293.2
2.219
0.25410E+01
-0.11420E-02
0.15092E-06
293-373
C10H18
trans-Decahydronaphthalene
293.2
2.184
0.26615E+01
-0.21241E-02
0.16864E-05
293-373
C10H18O
Eucalyptol
298.2
4.57
C10H18O2
Cyclohexyl butanoate
293.2
4.58
C10H18O4
Diethyl adipate
293.2
6.109
0.14824E+02
-0.40749E-01
0.37600E-04
293-343
C10H20
1-Decene
293.2
2.136
0.19091E+01
0.33442E-02
-0.87500E-05
273-323
C10H20
cis-5-Decene
298.2
2.071
C10H20
trans-5-Decene
298.2
2.030
C10H20
5-Methyl-4-nonene
293.2
2.175
C10H20
2,4,6-Trimethyl-3-heptene
293.2
2.293
C10H20Br2
1,10-Dibromodecane
303.2
6.56
0.17350E+02
-0.50328E-01
0.48633E-04
303-368
C10H20Cl2
1,10-Dichlorodecane
308.2
6.68
-0.57423E+01
0.94220E-01
-0.17500E-03
308-338
C10H20O
2-Decanone
287.2
8.3
C10H20O
Menthol
309.3
3.90
0.68202E+01
-0.15894E-01
0.20837E-04
309-358
C10H20O2
2,2-Dimethyloctanoic acid
296.2
2.8
C10H20O2
Octyl acetate
288.2
4.18
-0.34691E+01
0.58106E-01
-0.10952E-03
288-323
C10H20O2
2-Methylheptyl acetate
288.2
4.27
0.23285E+02
-0.11538E+00
0.17143E-03
288-323
C10H20O2
Pentyl pentanoate
305.6
4.076
0.77641E+01
-0.14335E-01
0.73740E-05
306-393
C10H20O2
Isopentyl pentanoate
292.2
3.6
C10H20O2
Isopentyl isopentanoate
288.2
4.39
0.14698E+02
-0.57726E-01
0.76190E-04
288-323
C10H20O2
Methyl nonanoate
293.2
3.943
C10H21Br
1-Bromodecane
298.2
4.44
0.11202E+02
-0.33491E-01
0.36314E-04
274-328
C10H21Cl
1-Chlorodecane
293.2
4.581
0.68741E+01
-0.12210E-02
-0.22500E-04
293-323
C10H21NO
N,N-Dibutylacetamide
293.2
19.1
C10H22
Decane
293.2
1.9853
0.24054E+01
-0.15445E-02
0.44643E-06
253-393
C10H22
2,7-Dimethyloctane
293.2
1.98
C10H22
4-Propylheptane
293.2
1.9955
C10H22O
1-Decanol
293.2
7.93
0.47195E+02
-0.20740E+00
0.24942E-03
293-343
C10H22O
2-Decanol
298.2
5.82
0.13621E+03
-0.81000E+00
0.12500E-02
288-308
C10H22O
3-Decanol
298.2
4.05
0.52090E+02
-0.31020E+00
0.50000E-03
288-308
C10H22O
4-Decanol
298.2
3.42
-0.11260E+02
0.93960E-01
-0.15000E-03
288-308
C10H22O
5-Decanol
298.2
3.24
-0.25832E+01
0.31456E-01
-0.40000E-04
288-308
C10H22O
2,2-Dimethyl-1-octanol
293.2
7.86
0.69536E+02
-0.34596E+00
0.46250E-03
293-333
C10H22O
Dipentyl ether
298.2
2.798
C10H22O
Diisopentyl ether
293.2
2.817
0.44690E+01
-0.63710E-02
0.25000E-05
293-323
C10H22OS
Dipentyl sulfoxide
348.2
18.8
C10H22O5
Tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether
298.2
7.68
C10H22S
Dipentyl sulfide
298.2
3.826
C10H23N
Decylamine
293.2
3.31
0.61497E+01
-0.12801E-01
0.10606E-04
293-373
C10H30O3Si4
Decamethyltetrasiloxane
293.2
2.370
C10H30O5Si5
Decamethylcyclopentasiloxane
293.2
2.50
C11H10
1-Methylnaphthalene
293.2
2.915
0.45126E+01
-0.76480E-02
0.75000E-05
293-333
C11H10
2-Methylnaphthalene
313.2
2.747
C11H10O
1-Methoxynaphthalene
293.2
4.020
0.71885E+01
-0.14838E-01
0.13750E-04
293-333
C11H10O
2-Methoxynaphthalene
353.2
3.563
0.56702E+01
-0.69754E-02
0.28571E-05
353-373
C11H12O2
Ethyl trans-cinnamate
293.2
5.63
C11H12O3
Ethyl benzoylacetate
303.2
13.50
0.93644E+01
0.74280E-01
-0.20000E-03
303-323
C11H14O2
Benzyl butanoate
301.2
4.55
C11H14O2
Phenyl pentanoate
293.2
4.30
C11H14O2
Butyl benzoate
303.2
5.52
0.77854E+01
-0.34972E-02
-0.13149E-04
303-358
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K


--- PAGE 1162 ---
6-173
C11H14O2
Isobutyl benzoate
291.2
5.39
C11H16
1,3-Diethyl-5-methylbenzene
293.2
2.264
C11H16
Pentamethylbenzene
334.0
2.358
0.30196E+01
-0.22619E-02
0.83831E-06
334-413
C11H22
1-Undecene
293.2
2.137
0.22132E+01
0.13121E-02
-0.53571E-05
273-323
C11H22O
2-Undecanone
285.3
8.3
C11H22O2
Nonyl acetate
293.2
3.87
C11H22O2
Pentyl hexanoate
288.2
4.22
0.83503E+01
-0.18449E-01
0.14286E-04
288-323
C11H23Br
1-Bromoundecane
272.6
4.61
C11H24
Undecane
293.2
1.9972
0.23637E+01
-0.12500E-02
-0.85869E-16
283-363
C11H24O
1-Undecanol
313.2
5.98
C11H25N
Undecylamine
293.2
3.25
0.54945E+01
-0.96161E-02
0.66017E-05
293-373
C12F27N
Tris(perfluorobutyl)amine
293.2
2.15
C12H8O
Dibenzofuran
373.2
3.00
C12H10
Biphenyl
348.2
2.53
0.26869E+01
0.63072E-03
-0.30995E-05
348-428
C12H10N2O
trans-Azoxybenzene
311.2
5.2
C12H10O
Diphenyl ether
283.2
3.726
C12H10O
2-Acetonaphthone
333.2
13.03
0.14538E+03
-0.73040E+00
0.10000E-02
333-363
C12H10OS
Diphenyl sulfoxide
344.7
16.6
C12H10O2S
Diphenyl sulfone
406.2
21.1
C12H10S
Diphenyl sulfide
298.2
5.43
C12H11N
Diphenylamine
323.2
3.73
C12H11NO
N-1-Naphthylenylacetamide
433.2
24.3
0.84739E+02
-0.12391E+00
-0.35714E-04
433-533
C12H12
1,6-Dimethylnaphthalene
293.2
2.7250
C12H12O
1-Ethoxynaphthalene
292.2
3.3
C12H14O2
Propyl cinnamate
293.2
5.45
C12H14O4
Diethyl phthalate
293.2
7.86
C12H16O
2-Cyclohexylphenol
328.2
3.97
C12H16O
4-Cyclohexylphenol
404.2
4.42
C12H16O2
Pentyl benzoate
293.2
5.07
C12H16O3
Pentyl salicylate
301.2
6.25
C12H16O3
Isopentyl salicylate
293.12
7.26
0.13129E+02
-0.19190E-01
-0.36060E-05
225-397
C12H17NO
N-Butyl-N-phenylacetamide
298.2
11.66
C12H18
Hexylbenzene
293.2
2.3
C12H18
1,3,5-Triethylbenzene
293.2
2.256
C12H18
Hexamethylbenzene
449.0
2.172
0.35710E+01
-0.46912E-02
0.35088E-05
449-489
C12H20O2
l-Bornyl acetate
303.2
4.46
0.60791E+01
0.98200E-02
-0.50000E-04
303-323
C12H22O
Dicyclohexyl ether
293.2
3.45
0.95324E+01
-0.31740E-01
0.37500E-04
293-333
C12H22O
Cyclododecanone
303.2
11.4
0.39327E+02
-0.13248E+00
0.13298E-03
303-423
C12H22O6
Dibutyl tartrate
314.2
9.4
C12H24
1-Dodecene
293.2
2.152
0.22581E+01
0.11106E-02
-0.50000E-05
273-323
C12H24O2
Decyl acetate
293.2
3.75
C12H24O2
Ethyl decanoate
293.2
3.75
0.70969E+01
-0.15080E-01
0.12500E-04
293-353
C12H24O2
Methyl undecanoate
293.2
3.671
C12H25Br
1-Bromododecane
298.2
4.07
0.86103E+01
-0.20891E-01
0.18994E-04
274-328
C12H25Cl
1-Chlorododecane
298.2
4.17
0.10002E+02
-0.27798E-01
0.27559E-04
274-328
C12H25I
1-Iodododecane
298.2
3.91
0.34641E+01
0.97404E-02
-0.27602E-04
293-323
C12H26
Dodecane
293.2
2.0120
0.23697E+01
-0.12200E-02
-0.36375E-16
283-363
C12H26O
1-Dodecanol
303.2
5.82
0.18518E+02
-0.44859E-01
0.99900E-05
303-358
C12H26O
2-Butyl-1-octanol
363.2
3.28
C12H27BO3
Tributyl borate
293.2
2.23
C12H27N
Dodecylamine
303.2
3.07
0.27999E+01
0.44810E-02
-0.11905E-04
303-373
C12H27N
Tributylamine
293.2
2.340
0.19846E+01
0.28108E-02
-0.54545E-05
233-293
C12H27O4P
Tributyl phosphate
293.2
8.34
0.26304E+02
-0.88480E-01
0.92857E-04
293-373
C12H28O4Si
Tetrapropoxysilane
298.2
3.21
C12H28Sn
Tetrapropylstannane
293.2
2.267
C12H30OSi2
Hexaethyldisiloxane
298.2
2.259
0.36559E+01
-0.72406E-02
0.85714E-05
298-333
C13H10O
Benzophenone
300.2
12.62
0.34130E+02
-0.10249E+00
0.10268E-03
300-420
C13H10O3
Phenyl salicylate
290.2
6.92
0.26545E+02
-0.11180E+00
0.15220E-03
290-358
C13H12
Diphenylmethane
303.2
2.540
0.30638E+01
-0.17286E-02
303-333
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K


--- PAGE 1163 ---
TeamLRN
6-174
C13H12O
Benzyl phenyl ether
313.2
3.748
C13H18O2
Hexyl benzoate
293.2
4.80
C13H20
Heptylbenzene
293.2
2.26
C13H20O
α-Ionone*
292.4
10.78
C13H20O
β-Ionone*
297.65
11.66
C13H24O4
Diethyl nonanedioate
303.2
5.133
C13H26
1-Tridecene
293.2
2.139
0.14154E+01
0.66514E-02
-0.14286E-04
273-323
C13H26O
7-Tridecanone
303.2
7.6
C13H26O2
Ethyl undecanoate
293.2
3.55
C13H26O2
Methyl dodecanoate
293.2
3.539
C13H27Br
1-Bromotridecane
281.15
4.19
C13H28
Tridecane
293.2
2.0213
0.23731E+01
-0.12000E-02
-0.21841E-15
283-363
C13H28
5-Butylnonane
293.2
2.0319
C13H28O
1-Tridecanol
333.2
4.02
C14H10
Anthracene
502.0
2.649
0.20571E+02
-0.69169E-01
0.66667E-04
502-516
C14H10
Phenanthrene
383.2
2.72
C14H10O2
Benzil
368.2
13.04
-0.23599E+02
0.22715E+00
-0.34667E-03
368-393
C14H12O2
Benzyl benzoate
303.2
5.26
0.76856E+01
-0.80000E-02
-0.80361E-15
303-358
C14H12O3
Benzyl salicylate
301.2
4.12
C14H14
1,2-Diphenylethane
331.2
2.47
0.31178E+01
-0.21572E-02
0.59800E-06
331-451
C14H14O
Dibenzyl ether
293.2
3.821
0.80154E+01
-0.20536E-01
0.21250E-04
293-333
C14H15N
Dibenzylamine
293.2
3.446
C14H16O2Si
Dimethyldiphenoxysilane
298.2
3.500
0.51669E+01
-0.77001E-02
0.70156E-05
283-353
C14H18O2
Pentyl cinnamate
293.2
4.89
C14H22
Octylbenzene
293.2
2.26
C14H26O4
Diisobutyl adipate
293.2
5.19
C14H26O4
Diethyl sebacate
303.2
4.995
0.39143E+02
-0.20965E+00
0.32000E-03
303-313
C14H28O2
Dodecyl acetate
293.2
3.6
C14H28O2
Ethyl laurate
273.2
3.94
C14H28O2
Methyl tridecanoate
293.2
3.442
C14H29Br
1-Bromotetradecane
293.2
3.84
0.10058E+02
-0.33905E-01
0.43528E-04
274-328
C14H30
Tetradecane
293.2
2.0343
0.23832E+01
-0.11900E-02
-0.51229E-16
283-363
C14H30O
1-Tetradecanol
318.2
4.42
0.12272E+02
-0.24667E-01
-0.13168E-13
318-358
C14H31N
Tetradecylamine
312.55
2.90
C15H12O4
Phenyl 2-(acetyloxy)benzoate
384.2
4.33
C15H26O6
Tributyrin
282.8
5.72
0.13152E+02
-0.36684E-01
0.36795E-04
199-283
C15H30O2
Methyl tetradecanoate
293.2
3.352
C15H31Br
1-Bromopentadecane
293.35
3.88
C15H32
Pentadecane
293.2
2.0391
0.23792E+01
-0.11600E-02
-0.71069E-16
283-363
C15H32O
1-Pentadecanol
333.2
3.70
C15H33N
Pentadecylamine
313.25
2.85
C15H33N
Triisopentylamine
294.2
2.29
C16H22O4
Dibutyl phthalate
293.2
6.58
0.12444E+02
-0.20000E-01
293-333
C16H32O2
Hexadecanoic acid
338.2
2.417
C16H32O2
Ethyl myristate
293.2
3.50
0.52642E+01
-0.60000E-02
-0.47358E-15
293-353
C16H32O2
Methyl pentadecanoate
293.2
3.296
C16H33Br
1-Bromohexadecane
298.2
3.68
0.58668E+01
-0.73333E-02
-0.52666E-14
298-328
C16H33I
1-Iodohexadecane
293.2
3.57
0.79531E+01
-0.22859E-01
0.26955E-04
293-323
C16H34
Hexadecane
293.2
2.0460
0.23861E+01
-0.11600E-02
0.25555E-15
293-363
C16H34O
1-Hexadecanol
333.2
3.69
0.85935E+01
-0.14714E-01
-0.45533E-13
333-363
C16H35N
Hexadecylamine
328.35
2.71
C16H36Sn
Tetrabutylstannane
293.2
9.74
0.56115E+02
-0.24812E+00
0.30682E-03
293-313
C17H12O3
2-Naphthyl salicylate
293.0
6.30
0.11229E+02
-0.18857E-01
0.70332E-05
293-353
C17H34O
9-Heptadecanone
328.2
5.43
0.44176E+02
-0.21183E+00
0.28571E-03
328-363
C17H34O2
Methyl palmitate
313.2
3.124
C17H36
Heptadecane
293.2
2.0578
0.23627E+01
-0.10400E-02
-0.10397E-12
293-308
C17H36O
1-Heptadecanol
333.2
3.41
C18H26O4
Dipentyl phthalate
293.2
6.00
C18H28O2
Phenyl laurate
293.2
3.28
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K


--- PAGE 1164 ---
6-175
C18H30O2
Linolenic acid
293.2
2.825
0.33867E+01
-0.19181E-02
274-368
C18H30O4
Dicyclohexyl adipate
308.2
4.84
C18H32O2
Linoleic acid
293.2
2.754
0.32073E+01
-0.15477E-02
275-368
C18H34O2
Oleic acid
293.2
2.336
0.25385E+01
-0.69448E-03
275-368
C18H34O4
Dibutyl sebacate
293.2
4.54
C18H36O2
Stearic acid
293.2
2.314
0.27159E+01
-0.13300E-02
293-373
C18H36O2
Hexadecyl acetate
308.2
3.19
0.47310E+01
-0.50000E-02
0.41338E-14
308-348
C18H36O2
Ethyl palmitate
303.2
3.07
0.57938E+01
-0.12294E-01
0.10919E-04
303-455
C18H36O2
Methyl heptadecanoate
313.2
3.07
C18H37Br
1-Bromooctadecane
303.35
3.53
0.46790E+01
-0.30355E-02
-0.24798E-05
303-332
C18H38O
1-Octadecanol
333.2
3.38
0.73784E+01
-0.12000E-01
-0.22871E-13
333-363
C18H39BO3
Trihexyl borate
293.2
2.22
C18H39N
Octadecylamine
326.35
2.67
C19H16
Triphenylmethane
367.2
2.46
0.40201E+01
-0.66507E-02
0.65329E-05
367-448
C19H18O3Si
Methyltriphenoxysilane
298.2
3.628
C19H32O2
Methyl linolenate
293.2
3.355
C19H34O2
Methyl linoleate
293.2
3.466
C19H36O2
Methyl oleate
293.2
3.211
C19H38O
10-Nonadecanone
353.2
5.37
C19H38O2
Methyl stearate
313.2
3.021
C19H40
Nonadecane
293.2
2.0706
C20H30O4
Dihexyl phthalate
293.2
5.62
C20H38O2
Ethyl oleate
301.2
3.17
0.57033E+01
-0.11223E-01
0.93447E-05
301-423
C20H40O2
Octadecyl acetate
308.2
3.07
0.44569E+01
-0.45000E-02
0.33923E-14
308-348
C20H40O2
Ethyl stearate
313.2
2.958
0.70930E+01
-0.19081E-01
0.19555E-04
331-440
C20H40O2
Methyl nonadecanoate
313.2
2.982
C20H42O
1-Eicosanol
338.2
3.13
0.21700E+01
0.12497E-01
-0.28571E-04
338-363
C20H42O
Didecyl ether
293.2
2.644
0.41465E+01
-0.62240E-02
0.37500E-05
293-333
C20H60O8Si9
Eicosamethylnonasiloxane
293.2
2.645
0.57840E+01
-0.16568E-01
0.20000E-04
293-323
C21H21O4P
Tricresyl phosphate*
298.2
6.7
C21H38O6
1,2,3-Propanetriyl hexanoate
293.2
4.476
C22H42O2
Butyl oleate
298.2
4.00
C22H44O2
Butyl stearate
298.2
3.120
0.73894E+02
-0.46261E+00
0.75500E-03
298-343
C22H46
Docosane
293.2
2.0840
C22H46O
1-Docosanol
348.2
2.94
0.82062E+01
-0.25069E-01
0.28571E-04
348-373
C24H20O4Si
Tetraphenoxysilane
333.2
3.4915
C24H38O4
Dioctyl phthalate
293.2
5.22
C26H50O4
Dioctyl sebacate
299.2
4.01
C27H50O6
1,2,3-Propanetriyl octanoate
293.2
3.931
C30H58O4
Ethylene glycol ditetradecanoate
343.2
2.98
C30H62
Triacontane
373.2
1.9112
C30H62
2,6,10,15,19,23-
373.2
1.9106
Hexamethyltetracosane
C34H66O4
Ethylene glycol dipalmitate
348.2
2.89
C34H68O2
Hexadecyl stearate
333.2
2.61
C38H74O4
Ethylene glycol distearate
353.2
2.79
C39H74O6
Glycerol trilaurate
313.2
3.287
C51H98O6
Glycerol tripalmitate
328.2
2.901
-0.29131E+01
0.32206E-01
-0.44154E-04
328-393
C57H104O6
Glycerol trioleate
293.2
3.109
C57H104O6
Glycerol trielaidate
313.2
2.980
C57H110O6
Glycerol tristearate
353.2
2.740
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF LIQUIDS (continued)
Mol. Form.
Name
T/K
ε
a
b
c
Range/K


--- PAGE 1165 ---
TeamLRN
6-174
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF GASES
This table gives the relative permittivity ε (often called the dielectric constant) of some common gases at a temperature of 20°C and pressure of
one atmosphere (101.325 kPa). Values of the permanent dipole moment µ in Debye Units (1 D = 3.33564 × 10–30 C m) are also included.
The density dependence of the permittivity is given by the equation
where ρm is the molar density, N is Avogadro’s number, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, and α is the molecular polarizability.
Therefore, in regions where the gas can be considered ideal, ε – 1 is approximately proportional to the pressure at constant temperature. For nonpolar
gases (µ = 0), ε –1 is inversely proportional to temperature at constant pressure.
The number of significant figures indicates the accuracy of the values given. The values of ε for air, Ar, H2, He, N2, O2, and CO2 are recommended
as reference values; these are accurate to 1 ppm or better.
The second part of the table gives the permittivity of water vapor in equilibrium with liquid water as a function of temperature (derived from
Reference 4).
REFERENCE
1. A. A. Maryott and F. Buckley, Table of Dielectric Constants and Electric Dipole Moments of Substances in the Gaseous State, National Bureau
of Standards Circular 537, 1953.
2. B. A. Younglove, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 11, Suppl. 1, 1982; 16, 577, 1987 (for data on N2, H2, O2, and hydrocarbons over a range of pressure
and temperature).
3. Landolt-Börnstein, Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in Science and Technology, New Series, Group IV, Vol. 4, Springer-Verlag,
Heidelberg, 1980 (for data at high pressures).
4. G. Birnbaum and S. K. Chatterjee, J. Appl. Phys., 23, 220, 1952 (for data on water vapor).
Mol. form.
Name
ε
µ/D
Compounds not containing carbon
Air (dry,CO2 free)
1.0005364
Ar
Argon
1.0005172
0
BF3
Boron trifluoride
1.0011
0
BrH
Hydrogen bromide
1.00279
0.827
ClH
Hydrogen chloride
1.00390
1.109
F3N
Nitrogen trifluoride
1.0013
0.235
F6S
Sulfur hexafluoride
1.00200
0
HI
Hydrogen iodide
1.00214
0.448
H2
Hydrogen
1.0002538
0
H2S
Hydrogen sulfide
1.00344
0.97
H3N
Ammonia
1.00622
1.471
He
Helium
1.0000650
0
Kr
Krypton
1.00078
0
NO
Nitric oxide
1.00060
0.159
N2
Nitrogen
1.0005480
0
N2O
Nitrous oxide
1.00104
0.161
Ne
Neon
1.00013
0
O2
Oxygen
1.0004947
0
O2S
Sulfur dioxide
1.00825
1.633
O3
Ozone
1.0017
0.534
Xe
Xenon
1.00126
0
Compounds containing carbon
CF4
Tetrafluoromethane
1.00121
0
CO
Carbon monoxide
1.00065
0.110
CO2
Carbon dioxide
1.000922
0
ε
ε
ρ
π
α
π
µ
–
N
N
k T
1
2
4
3
4
9
2
+
=
+




m


--- PAGE 1166 ---
6-175
PERMITTIVITY (DIELECTRIC CONSTANT) OF GASES (continued)
Mol. form.
Name
ε
µ/D
CH3Br
Bromomethane
1.01028
1.822
CH3Cl
Chloromethane
1.01080
1.892
CH3F
Fluoromethane
1.00973
1.858
CH3I
Iodomethane
1.00914
1.62
CH4
Methane
1.00081
0
C2H2
Acetylene
1.00124
0
C2H3Cl
Chloroethylene
1.0075
1.45
C2H4
Ethylene
1.00134
0
C2H5Cl
Chloroethane
1.01325
2.05
C2H6
Ethane
1.00140
0
C2H6O
Dimethyl ether
1.0062
1.30
C3H6
Propene
1.00228
0.366
C3H6
Cyclopropane
1.00178
0
C3H8
Propane
1.00200
0.084
C4H10
Butane
1.00258
0
C4H10
Isobutane
1.00260
0.132
PERMITTIVITY OF SATURATED WATER VAPOR
t/°C
ε
t/°C
ε
0
1.00007
60
1.00144
10
1.00012
70
1.00213
20
1.00022
80
1.00305
30
1.00037
90
1.00428
40
1.00060
100
1.00587
50
1.00095


--- PAGE 1190 ---
6-186
VISCOSITY OF LIQUIDS
The absolute viscosity of some common liquids at temperatures between –25 and 100∞C is given in this table. Values were derived by fitting
experimental data to suitable expressions for the temperature dependence. The substances are arranged by molecular formula in the modified Hill order
(see Preface). All values are given in units of millipascal seconds (mPa s); this unit is identical to centipoise (cp).
Viscosity values correspond to a nominal pressure of 1 atmosphere. If a value is given at a temperature above the normal boiling point, the applicable
pressure is understood to be the vapor pressure of the liquid at that temperature. A few values are given at a temperature slightly below the normal
freezing point; these refer to the supercooled liquid.
The accuracy ranges from 1% in the best cases to 5 to 10% in the worst cases. Additional significant figures are included in the table to facilitate
interpolation.
REFERENCES
1. Viswanath, D. S. and Natarajan, G., Data Book on the Viscosity of Liquids, Hemisphere Publishing Corp., New York, 1989.
2. Daubert, T. E., Danner, R. P., Sibul, H. M., and Stebbins, C. C., Physical and Thermodynamic Properties of Pure Compounds: Data
Compilation, extant 1994 (core with 4 supplements), Taylor & Francis, Bristol, PA (also available as database).
3. Ho, C. Y., Ed., CINDAS Data Series on Material Properties, Vol. V-1, Properties of Inorganic and Organic Fluids, Hemisphere Publishing
Corp., New York, 1988.
4. Stephan, K. and Lucas, K., Viscosity of Dense Fluids, Plenum Press, New York, 1979.
5. Vargaftik, N. B., Tables of Thermophysical Properties of Liquids and Gases, 2nd ed., John Wiley, New York, 1975.
Molecular
Viscosity in mPa s
formula
Name
–25∞C
0∞C
25∞C
50∞C
75∞C
100∞C
Compounds not containing carbon
Br2
Bromine
1.252
0.944
0.746
Cl3HSi
Trichlorosilane
0.415
0.326
Cl3P
Phosphorous trichloride
0.870
0.662
0.529
0.439
Cl4Si
Tetrachlorosilane
99.4
96.2
H2O
Water
1.793
0.890
0.547
0.378
0.282
H4N2
Hydrazine
0.876
0.628
0.480
0.384
Hg
Mercury
1.526
1.402
1.312
1.245
NO2
Nitrogen dioxide
0.532
0.402
Compounds containing carbon
CCl3F
Trichlorofluoromethane
0.740
0.539
0.421
CCl4
Tetrachloromethane
1.321
0.908
0.656
0.494
CS2
Carbon disulfide
0.429
0.352
CHBr3
Tribromomethane
1.857
1.367
1.029
CHCl3
Trichloromethane
0.988
0.706
0.537
0.427
CHN
Hydrogen cyanide
0.235
0.183
CH2Br2
Dibromomethane
1.948
1.320
0.980
0.779
0.652
CH2Cl2
Dichloromethane
0.727
0.533
0.413
CH2O2
Formic acid
1.607
1.030
0.724
0.545
CH3I
Iodomethane
0.594
0.469
CH3NO
Formamide
7.114
3.343
1.833
CH3NO2
Nitromethane
1.311
0.875
0.630
0.481
0.383
0.317
CH4O
Methanol
1.258
0.793
0.544
CH5N
Methylamine
0.319
0.231
C2Cl3F3
1,1,2-Trichlorotrifluoro-
  ethane
1.465
0.945
0.656
0.481
C2Cl4
Tetrachloroethylene
1.114
0.844
0.663
0.535
0.442
C2HCl3
Trichloroethylene
0.703
0.545
0.444
0.376
C2HCl5
Pentachloroethane
3.761
2.254
1.491
1.061
C2HF3O2
Trifluoroacetic acid
0.808
0.571
C2H2Cl2
cis-1,2-Dichloroethylene
0.786
0.575
0.445
C2H2Cl2
trans-1,2-Dichloroethylene
0.522
0.398
0.317
0.261
C2H2Cl4
1,1,1,2-Tetrachloroethane
3.660
2.200
1.437
1.006
0.741
0.570
C2H3ClF2
1-Chloro-1,1-difluoro-
  ethane
0.477
0.376


--- PAGE 1201 ---
TeamLRN
6-214
THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY OF LIQUIDS
This table gives the thermal conductivity of about 275 liquids at temperatures between –25 and 100°C. Values refer to nominal atmospheric pres-
sure; when an entry is given for a temperature above the normal boiling point of the liquid, the pressure is understood to be the saturation vapor
pressure at that temperature. Reference 1 contains data on many of these liquids at high pressures. Data on halocarbon refrigerants over a wide
range of temperature and pressure may be found in Reference 6.
Values given to three decimal places (i.e., to 0.001 W/m K) have an uncertainty of 2% to 5%. Values given to 0.0001 W/m K should be accurate
to 1% or better.
Substances are arranged by molecular formula in Hill order, except that compounds not containing carbon precede those that do contain carbon.
REFERENCES
1. Vargaftik, N. B., Filippov, L. P., Tarzimanov, A. A., and Totskii, E. E., Handbook of Thermal Conductivity of Liquids and Gases, CRC Press,
Boca Raton FL, 1994.
2. Daubert, T. E., Danner, R. P., Sibul, H. M., and Stebbins, C. C., Physical and Thermodynamic Properties of Pure Compounds: Data Compi-
lation, extant 1994 (core with four supplements), Taylor and Francis, Bristol, PA (also available as a database).
3. Watanabe, H., J. Chem. Eng. Data 48, 124, 2003.
4. Watanabe, H., and Seong, D. J., Int. J. Thermophys. 23, 337, 2002.
5. Nieto de Castro, C. A., Li, S. F. Y., Nagashima, A., Trengove, R. D., and Wakeham, W. A., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 15, 1073, 1986.
6. Krauss, R., and Stephan, K., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 18, 43, 1989.
7. Assael, M. J., Ramires, M. L. V., Nieto de Castro, C. A., and Wakeham, W. A., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 19, 113, 1990.
8. Ramires, M. L. V., Nieto de Castro, C. A., Nagasaka, Y., Nagashima, A., Assael, M. J., and Wakeham, W. A., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 24,
1377, 1995.
9. Ramires, M. L. V., Nieto de Castro, C. A., Perkins, R. A., Nagasaka, Y., Nagashima, A., Assael, M. J., and Wakeham, W. A., J. Phys. Chem.
Ref. Data 29, 133, 2000.
10. Marsh, K. N., Ed., Recommended Reference Materials for the Realization of Physicochemical Properties, Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications,
Oxford, 1987.
11. Beaton, C. F., and Hewitt, G. F., Physical Property Data for the Design Engineer, Hemisphere Publishing Corp., New York, 1989.
Molecular 
Formula
Thermal Conductivity in W/m K
Name
–25°C
0°C
25°C
50°C
75°C
100°C
Ref.
Cl4Ge
Germanium(IV) chloride
0.111
0.105
0.100
0.095
0.090
0.084
1
Cl4Si
Tetrachlorosilane
0.099
0.096
2
Cl4Sn
Tin(IV) chloride
0.123
0.117
0.112
0.106
0.101
0.095
1
Cl4Ti
Titanium(IV) chloride
0.143
0.138
0.134
0.129
0.124
1
H2O
Water
0.5562
0.6062
0.6423
0.6643
0.6729
8
Hg
Mercury
7.85
8.175
8.514
8.842
9.161
9.475
11
CCl3F
Trichloroﬂuoromethane
0.102
0.096
0.089
0.083
0.076
0.070
1
CCl4
Tetrachloromethane
0.109
0.103
0.098
0.092
0.087
1
CHCl3
Trichloromethane
0.127
0.122
0.117
0.112
0.107
0.102
2
CH2Br2
Dibromomethane
0.120
0.114
0.108
0.103
0.097
2
CH2Cl2
Dichloromethane
0.158
0.149
0.140
0.133
0.128
0.127
1
CH2I2
Diiodomethane
0.098
0.093
0.088
0.083
1
CH2O2
Formic acid
0.267
0.265
0.263
0.261
1
CH3NO2
Nitromethane
0.226
0.215
0.204
0.193
0.182
0.171
1
CH4O
Methanol
0.218
0.210
0.202
0.195
0.189
0.182
1
CS2
Carbon disulﬁde
0.154
0.149
2
C2Br2F4
1,2-Dibromotetraﬂuoroethane
0.071
0.066
0.061
0.057
0.053
0.049
1
C2Cl3F3
1,1,2-Trichloro-1,2,2-triﬂuoroethane
0.0847
0.0790
0.0736
0.0683
6
C2Cl4
Tetrachloroethene
0.117
0.110
0.104
0.098
0.093
1
C2Cl4F2
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloro-1,2-diﬂuoroethane
0.082
0.078
0.074
0.069
1
C2HCl3
Trichloroethene
0.128
0.121
0.114
0.106
0.098
0.090
1
C2H2Cl4
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane
0.124
0.118
0.111
0.104
0.098
0.091
1
C2H3Cl3
1,1,1-Trichloroethane
0.106
0.101
0.096
2
C2H3N
Acetonitrile
0.208
0.198
0.188
0.178
0.168
2
C2H4Br2
1,2-Dibromoethane
0.100
0.096
0.092
0.088
1
C2H4Cl2
1,2-Dichloroethane
0.144
0.139
0.133
0.128
0.122
0.117
1
C2H4O2
Acetic acid
0.158
0.153
0.149
0.144
2
C2H4O2
Methyl formate
0.194
0.187
1


--- PAGE 1210 ---
6-181
DIFFUSION COEFFICIENTS IN LIQUIDS AT INFINITE DILUTION
This table lists diffusion coefficients DAB at infinite dilution for some binary liquid mixtures. Although values are given to two decimal places,
measurements in the literature are often in poor agreement. Therefore most values in the table cannot be relied upon to better than 10%.
Solvents are listed in alphabetical order, as are the solutes within each solvent group.
REFERENCE
Landolt-Börnstein, Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in Science and Technology, Sixth Edition, Vol. II/5a, 1969.
DAB
Solute
Solvent
t/°C
 10–5 cm2 s–1
Acetic acid
Acetone
25
3.31
Benzoic acid
Acetone
25
2.62
Formic acid
Acetone
25
3.77
Nitrobenzene
Acetone
20
2.94
Tetrachloromethane
Acetone
25
3.29
Trichloromethane
Acetone
25
3.64
Water
Acetone
25
4.56
Acetic acid
Benzene
25
2.09
Aniline
Benzene
25
1.96
Benzoic acid
Benzene
25
1.38
Bromobenzene
Benzene
8
1.45
2-Butanone
Benzene
30
2.09
Chloroethylene
Benzene
8
1.77
Cyclohexane
Benzene
25
2.25
Ethanol
Benzene
25
3.02
Formic acid
Benzene
25
2.28
Heptane
Benzene
25
1.78
Methanol
Benzene
25
3.80
Toluene
Benzene
25
1.85
1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene
Benzene
8
1.34
Trichloromethane
Benzene
25
2.26
Adipic acid
1-Butanol
30
0.40
Benzene
1-Butanol
25
1.00
Biphenyl
1-Butanol
25
0.63
Butyric acid
1-Butanol
30
0.51
p-Dichlorobenzene
1-Butanol
25
0.82
Methanol
1-Butanol
30
0.59
Oleic acid
1-Butanol
30
0.25
Propane
1-Butanol
25
1.57
Water
1-Butanol
25
0.56
Benzene
Cyclohexane
25
1.41
Tetrachloromethane
Cyclohexane
25
1.49
Toluene
Cyclohexane
25
1.57
Allyl alcohol
Ethanol
20
0.98
Benzene
Ethanol
25
1.81
Iodine
Ethanol
25
1.32
Iodobenzene
Ethanol
20
1.00
3-Methyl-1-butanol
Ethanol
20
0.81
Pyridine
Ethanol
20
1.10
Tetrachloromethane
Ethanol
25
1.50
Water
Ethanol
25
1.24
Acetic acid
Ethyl acetate
20
2.18
Acetone
Ethyl acetate
20
3.18
2-Butanone
Ethyl acetate
30
2.93
Ethyl benzoate
Ethyl acetate
20
1.85
Nitrobenzene
Ethyl acetate
20
2.25
Water
Ethyl acetate
25
3.20
Benzene
Heptane
25
3.91
Toluene
Heptane
25
3.72
Bromobenzene
Hexane
8
2.60
2-Butanone
Hexane
30
3.74
Dodecane
Hexane
25
2.73
Iodine
Hexane
25
4.45
Methane
Hexane
25
0.09
Propane
Hexane
25
4.87
Tetrachloromethane
Hexane
25
3.70
Toluene
Hexane
25
4.21
Acetone
Tetrachloromethane
25
1.75
Benzene
Tetrachloromethane
25
1.42
Cyclohexane
Tetrachloromethane
25
1.30
Ethanol
Tetrachloromethane
25
1.90
Iodine
Tetrachloromethane
30
1.63
Trichloromethane
Tetrachloromethane
25
1.66
Acetic acid
Toluene
25
2.26
Benzene
Toluene
25
2.54
Benzoic acid
Toluene
25
1.49
Cyclohexane
Toluene
25
2.42
Formic acid
Toluene
25
2.65
Water
Toluene
25
6.19
Acetone
Trichloromethane
25
2.55
Benzene
Trichloromethane
25
2.89
2-Butanone
Trichloromethane
25
2.13
Butyl acetate
Trichloromethane
25
1.71
Diethyl ether
Trichloromethane
25
2.15
Ethanol
Trichloromethane
15
2.20
Ethyl acetate
Trichloromethane
25
2.02
Acetic acid
Water
25
1.29
Acetone
Water
25
1.28
Acetonitrile
Water
15
1.26
Alanine
Water
25
0.91
Allyl alcohol
Water
15
0.90
Aniline
Water
20
0.92
Arabinose
Water
20
0.69
Benzene
Water
20
1.02
1-Butanol
Water
25
0.56
Caprolactam
Water
25
0.87
Chloroethylene
Water
25
1.34
Cyclohexane
Water
20
0.84
Diethylamine
Water
20
0.97
Ethanol
Water
25
1.24
Ethanolamine
Water
25
1.08
Ethyl acetate
Water
20
1.00
Ethylbenzene
Water
20
0.81
Ethylene glycol
Water
25
1.16
Glucose
Water
25
0.67
Glycerol
Water
25
1.06
Glycine
Water
25
1.05
Lactose
Water
15
0.38
Maltose
Water
15
0.38
Mannitol
Water
15
0.50
Methane
Water
25
1.49
Methanol
Water
15
1.28
3-Methyl-1-butanol
Water
10
0.69
Methylcyclopentane
Water
20
0.85
Phenol
Water
20
0.89
1-Propanol
Water
15
0.87
Propene
Water
25
1.44
Pyridine
Water
25
0.58
Raffinose
Water
15
0.33
Sucrose
Water
25
0.52
Toluene
Water
20
0.85
Urea
Water
25
1.38
Urethane
Water
15
0.80
DAB
Solute
Solvent
t/°C
 10–5 cm2 s–1


--- PAGE 1212 ---
7-1
PROPERTIES OF AMINO ACIDS
This table gives selected properties of some important amino acids and closely related compounds. The first part of the table lists the 20 “standard”
amino acids that are the basic constituents of proteins (structures of these amino acids may be found in the following table). The second part includes
other amino acids and related compounds of biochemical importance.  Within each part of the table the compounds are listed by name in alphabetical
order.
Symbol — Three-letter symbol for the standard amino acids
Mr — Molecular weight
tm — Melting point
pKa , pKb , pKc , pKd — Negative of the logarithm of the acid dissociation constants for the COOH and NH2 groups
(and, in some cases, other groups) in the molecule (at 25oC)
pI — pH at the isoelectric point
S — Solubility in water at 25oC in units of grams of compound per kilogram of water; when quantitative data are not
available, the notations sl.s. (for slightly soluble) and v.s. (for very soluble) are used.
Data on the enthalpy of formation of many of these compounds are included in the table “Standard Thermodynamic Properties of Chemical
Substances” in Section 5 of this Handbook. Absorption spectra and optical rotation data can be found in Reference 3.  Partial molar volume and other
thermodynamic properties, including solubility as a function of temperature, are given in References 3 and 5. Most of the pK values come from
Reference 7.
REFERENCES
1. Dawson, R. M. C., Elliott, D. C., Elliott, W. H., and Jones, K. M., Data for Biochemical Research, 3rd ed., Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1986.
2. Budavari, S., Ed., The Merck Index, Twelfth Edition, Merck & Co., Rahway, NJ, 1996.
3. Sober, H. A., Ed., CRC Handbook of Biochemistry. Selected Data for Molecular Biology, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1968.
4. Voet, D. and Voet, J. G., Biochemistry, Second Edition, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1995.
5. Hinz, H. J., Ed., Thermodynamic Data for Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1986.
6. Fasman, G. D., Ed., Practical Handbook of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1989.
7. Smith, R. M., and Martell, A. E., NIST Standard Reference Database 46: Critically Selected Stability Constants of Metal Complexes
Database, Version 3.0, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, 1997.
8. Jin, Z. and Chao, K. C., J. Chem. Eng. Data, 37, 199, 1992.
The standard amino acids:
Symbol
Name
Mol. form.
Mr
tm/° C
pKa
pKb
pKc
pI
S/g kg-1
Ala
Alanine
C3H7NO2
89.09
297
2.33
9.71
6.00
165.0
Arg
Arginine
C6H14N4O2
174.20
244
2.03
9.00
12.10
10.76
 182.6
Asn
Asparagine
C4H8N2O3
132.12
235
2.16
8.73
5.41
25.1
Asp
Aspartic acid
C4H7NO4
133.10
270
1.95
9.66
3.71
2.77
4.95
Cys
Cysteine
C3H7NO2S
121.16
240
1.91
10.28
8.14
5.07
v.s.
Glu
Glutamic acid
C5H9NO4
147.13
160
2.16
9.58
4.15
3.22
8.61
Gln
Glutamine
C5H10N2O3
146.15
185
2.18
9.00
5.65
42
Gly
Glycine
C2H5NO2
75.07
290
2.34
9.58
5.97
250.9
His
Histidine
C6H9N3O2
155.16
287
1.70
9.09
6.04
7.59
43.5
Ile
Isoleucine
C6H13NO2
131.17
284
2.26
9.60
6.02
34.2
Leu
Leucine
C6H13NO2
131.17
293
2.32
9.58
5.98
22.0
Lys
Lysine
C6H14N2O2
146.19
224
2.15
9.16
10.67
9.74
5.8
Met
Methionine
C5H11NO2S
149.21
281
2.16
9.08
5.74
56
Phe
Phenylalanine
C9H11NO2
165.19
283
2.18
9.09
5.48
27.9
Pro
Proline
C5H9NO2
115.13
221
1.95
10.47
6.30
1623
Ser
Serine
C3H7NO3
105.09
228
2.13
9.05
5.68
50.2
Thr
Threonine
C4H9NO3
119.12
256
2.20
8.96
5.60
98.1
Trp
Tryptophan
C11H12N2O2
204.23
289
2.38
9.34
5.89
13.2
Tyr
Tyrosine
C9H11NO3
181.19
343
2.24
9.04
10.10
5.66
0.46
Val
Valine
C5H11NO2
117.15
315
2.27
9.52
5.96
88.5


--- PAGE 1217 ---
TeamLRN
7-6
PROPERTIES OF FATTY ACIDS
This table gives the systematic names and selected properties of some of the more important fatty acids of five or more carbon atoms. Compounds
are listed first by degree of saturation and, secondly, by number of carbon atoms. The following data are included:
Mr: Molecular weight
S: Aqueous solubility at 20° C in units of grams of solute per 100 grams of water
tm: Melting point in ° C
REFERENCES
1. Dawson, R. M. C., Elliott, D. C., Elliott, W. H., and Jones, K. M., Data for Biochemical Research, Third Edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford,
1986.
2. Fasman, G. D., Ed., Practical Handbook of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1989.
Common name
Systematic name
Mol. form.
Mr
tm/° C
S
Saturated
Valeric acid
Pentanoic acid
C5H10O2
102.13
-33.6
2.5
Isovaleric acid
3-Methylbutanoic acid
C5H10O2
102.13
-29.3
4.3
Caproic acid
Hexanoic acid
C6H12O2
116.16
-3
0.967
Enanthic acid
Heptanoic acid
C7H14O2
130.19
-7.17
0.24
Caprylic acid
Octanoic acid
C8H16O2
144.21
16.5
0.080
Pelargonic acid
Nonanoic acid
C9H18O2
158.24
12.4
0.0284
Capric acid
Decanoic acid
C10H20O2
172.27
31.4
0.015
Lauric acid
Dodecanoic acid
C12H24O2
200.32
43.8
0.0055
Tridecylic acid
Tridecanoic acid
C13H26O2
214.35
41.5
0.0033
Myristic acid
Tetradecanoic acid
C14H28O2
228.38
54.2
0.0020
Pentadecylic acid
Pentadecanoic acid
C15H30O2
242.40
52.3
0.0012
Palmitic acid
Hexadecanoic acid
C16H32O2
256.43
62.5
0.00072
Margaric acid
Heptadecanoic acid
C17H34O2
270.46
61.3
0.00042
Stearic acid
Octadecanoic acid
C18H36O2
284.48
69.3
0.00029
Arachidic acid
Eicosanoic acid
C20H40O2
312.54
76.5
Phytanic acid
3,7,11,15-Tetramethylhexadecanoic acid
C20H40O2
312.54
-65
Behenic acid
Docosanoic acid
C22H44O2
340.59
81.5
Lignoceric acid
Tetracosanoic acid
C24H48O2
368.64
87.5
Cerotic acid
Hexacosanoic acid
C26H52O2
396.70
88.5
Montanic acid
Octacosanoic acid
C28H56O2
424.75
90.9
Monounsaturated
Caproleic acid
9-Decenoic acid
C10H18O2
170.25
26.5
Palmitoleic acid
cis-9-Hexadecenoic acid
C16H30O2
254.41
0.5
Oleic acid
cis-9-Octadecenoic acid
C18H34O2
282.47
13.4
Elaidic acid
trans-9-Octadecenoic acid
C18H34O2
282.47
45
Vaccenic acid
trans-11-Octadecenoic acid
C18H34O2
282.47
44
Erucic acid
cis-13-Docosenoic acid
C22H42O2
338.57
34.7
Brassidic acid
trans-13-Docosenoic acid
C22H42O2
338.57
61.9
Nervonic acid
cis-15-Tetracosenoic acid
C24H46O2
366.63
43
Diunsaturated
Linoleic acid
cis,cis-9,12-Octadecadienoic acid
C18H32O2
280.45
-7
Triunsaturated
cis-Eleostearic acid
trans,cis,trans-9,11,13-Octadecatrienoic acid
C18H30O2
278.44
49
trans-Eleostearic acid
trans,trans,trans-9,11,13-
C18H30O2
278.44
71.5
Octadecatrienoic acid
Linolenic acid
cis,cis,cis-9,12,15-Octadecatrienoic acid
C18H30O2
278.44
-11
Tetraunsaturated
Arachidonic acid
5,8,11,14-Eicosatetraenoic acid, (all-trans)
C20H32O2
304.47
-49.5


--- PAGE 1229 ---
TeamLRN
Section 8: Analytical Chemistry
        Preparation of Special Analytical Reagents
        Standard Solutions of Acids, Bases, and Salts
        Standard Solutions of Oxidation and Reduction Reagents
        Organic Analytical Reagents for the Determination of Inorganic Substances
        Flame and Bead Tests
        Acid-Base Indicators
        Fluorescent Indicators
        Conversion Formulas for Concentration of Solutions
        Electrochemical Series
        Reduction and Oxidation Potentials for Certain Ion Radicals
        pH Scale for Aqueous Solutions
        Practical pH Measurements on Natural Waters
        Buffer Solutions Giving Round Values of pH at 25°C
        Dissociation Constants of Inorganic Acids and Bases
        Dissociation Constants of Organic Acids and Bases
        Concentrative Properties of Aqueous Solutions: Density, Refractive Index, Freezing Point Depression, and Viscosity
        Ion Product of Water Substance
        Ionization Constant of Normal and Heavy Water
        Solubility of Selected Gases in Water
        Solubility of Carbon Dioxide in Water at Various Temperatures and Pressures
        Aqueous Solubility and Henry's Law Constants of Organic Compounds
        Aqueous Solubility of Inorganic Compounds at Various Temperatures
        Solubility Product Constants
        Solubility of Common Salts at Ambient Temperatures
        Solubility Chart
        Reduction of Weighings in Air to Vacuo
        Volume of One Gram of Water
        Properties of Carrier Gases for Gas Chromatography
        Solvents for Ultraviolet Spectrophotometry
        13C Chemical Shifts of Useful NMR Solvents
        Mass Spectral Peaks of Common Organic Solvents


--- PAGE 1231 ---
TeamLRN
8-2
PREPARATION OF SPECIAL ANALYTICAL REAGENTS (continued)
Cuprous chloride, ammoniacal (reagent for CO in gas analysis).
1. The acid solution of cuprous chloride as prepared above is neutralized with ammonium hydroxide until an ammonia odor persists. An excess
of metallic copper must be kept in the solution.
2. Pour 800 mL of acidic cuprous chloride, prepared by the Winkler method, into about 4 L of water. Transfer the precipitate to a 250 mL
graduate. After several hours, siphon off the liquid above the 50 mL mark and refill with 7.5% NH4OH solution which may be prepared by
diluting 50 mL of conc. NH4OH with 150 mL of water. The solution is well shaken and allowed to stand for several hours. It should have a
faint odor of ammonia.
Dichlorofluorescein indicator. Dissolve 1 g in 1 L of 70% alcohol or 1 g of the sodium salt in 1 L of water.
Dimethyglyoxime, 0.01 N. Dissolve 0.6 g of dimethylglyoxime (2,3-butanedione oxime) in 500 mL of 95% ethanol. This is an especially sensitive
test for nickel, a very definite crimson color being produced.
Diphenylamine (reagent for rayon). Dissolve 0.2 g in 100 mL of concentrated sulfuric acid.
Diphenylamine sulfonate (for titration of iron with K2Cr2O7). Dissolve 0.32 g of the barium salt of diphenylamine sulfonic acid in 100 mL of water,
add 0.5 g of sodium sulfate and filter off the precipitate of BaSO4.
Diphenylcarbazide. Dissolve 0.2 g of diphenylcarbazide in 10 mL of glacial acetic acid and dilute to 100 mL with 95% ethanol.
Esbach’s reagent (estimation of protein). To a water solution of 10 g of picric acid and 20 g of citric acid, add sufficient water to make 1 L of solution.
Eschka’s compound. Two parts of calcined (“light”) magnesia are thoroughly mixed with 1 part of anhydrous sodium carbonate.
Fehling’s solution (reagent for reducing sugars.)
1. Copper sulfate solution. Dissolve 34.66 g of CuSO4⋅5H2O in water and dilute to 500 mL.
2. Alkaline tartrate solution. Dissolve 173 g of potassium sodium tartrate (Rochelle salt, KNaC4H4O6⋅4H2O) and 50 g of NaOH in water and
dilute when cold to 500 mL.
Mix equal volumes of the two solutions at the time of using.
Ferric-alum indicator. Dissolve 140 g of ferric ammonium sulfate crystals in 400 mL of hot water. When cool, filter, and make up to a volume of
500 mL with dilute nitric acid.
Folin’s mixture (for uric acid). To 650 mL of water add 500 g of (NH4)2SO4, 5 g of uranium acetate, and 6 g of glacial acetic acid. Dilute to 1 L.
Formaldehyde — sulfuric acid (Marquis’ reagent for alkaloids). Add 10 mL of formaldehyde solution to 50 mL of sulfuric acid.
Froehde’s reagent. See Sulfomolybdic acid.
Fuchsin (reagent for linen). Dissolve 1 g of fuchsin in 100 mL of alcohol.
Fuchsin — sulfurous acid (Schiff’s reagent for aldehydes). Dissolve 0.5 g of fuchsin and 9 g of sodium bisulfite in 500 mL of water, and add 10 mL
of HCl. Keep in well-stoppered bottles and protect from light.
Gunzberg’s reagent (detection of HCl in gastric juice). Prepare as needed a solution containing 4 g of phloroglucinol (1,3,5-benzenetriol) and 2 g
of vanillin in 100 mL of absolute ethanol.
Hager’s reagent. See Picric acid.
Hanus solution (for iodine number). Dissolve 13.2 g of resublimed iodine in 1 L of glacial acetic acid which will pass the dichromate test for reducible
matter. Add sufficient bromine to double the halogen content, determined by titration (3 mL is about the proper amount). The iodine may be
dissolved by the aid of heat, but the solution should be cold when the bromine is added.
Iodine, tincture of. To 50 mL of water add 70 g of I2 and 50 g of KI. Dilute to 1 L with alcohol.
Iodo-potassium iodide (Wagner’s reagent for alkaloids). Dissolve 2 g of iodine and 6 g of KI in 100 mL of water.
Litmus (indicator). Extract litmus powder three times with boiling alcohol, each treatment consuming an hour. Reject the alcoholic extract. Treat
residue with an equal weight of cold water and filter; then exhaust with five times its weight of boiling water, cool and filter. Combine the aqueous
extracts.
Magnesia mixture (reagent for phosphates and arsenates). Dissolve 55 g of magnesium chloride and 105 g of ammonium chloride in water, barely
acidify with hydrochloric acid, and dilute to 1 L. The ammonium hydroxide may be omitted until just previous to use. The reagent, if completely
mixed and stored for any period of time, becomes turbid
Magnesium uranyl acetate. Dissolve 100 g of UO2(C2H3O2)2⋅2H2O in 60 mL of glacial acetic acid and dilute to 500 mL. Dissolve 330 g of
Mg(C2H3O2)2⋅4H2O in 60 mL of glacial acetic acid and dilute to 200 mL. Heat solutions to the boiling point until clear, pour the magnesium solution
into the uranyl solution, cool and dilute to 1 L. Let stand over night and filter if necessary.
Marme’s reagent. See Potassium-cadmium iodide.
Marquis’ reagent. See Formaldehyde-sulfuric acid.
Mayer’s reagent (white precipitate with most alkaloids in slightly acid solutions). Dissolve 1.358 g of HgCl2 in 60 mL of water and pour into a solution
of 5 g of KI in 10 mL of H2O. Add sufficient water to make 100 mL.
Methyl orange indicator. Dissolve 1 g of methyl orange in 1 L of water. Filter, if necessary.
Methyl orange, modified. Dissolve 2 g of methyl orange and 2.8 g of xylene cyanole FF in 1 L of 50% alcohol.
Methyl red indicator. Dissolve 1 g of methyl red in 600 mL of alcohol and dilute with 400 mL of water.
Methyl red, modified. Dissolve 0.50 g of methyl red and 1.25 g of xylene cyanole FF in 1 L of 90% alcohol. Or, dissolve 1.25 g of methyl red and
0.825 g of methylene blue in 1 L of 90% alcohol.
Millon’s reagent (for albumins and phenols). Dissolve 1 part of mercury in 1 part of cold fuming nitric acid. Dilute with twice the volume of water
and decant the clear solution after several hours.
Molisch’s reagent. See 1-Naphthol.
1-Naphthol (Molisch’s reagent for wool). Dissolve 15 g of 1-naphthol in 100 mL of alcohol or chloroform.
Nessler’s reagent (for ammonia). Dissolve 50 g of KI in the smallest possible quantity of cold water (50 mL). Add a saturated solution of mercuric
chloride (about 22 g in 350 mL of water will be needed) until an excess is indicated by the formation of a precipitate. Then add 200 mL of 5 N NaOH
and dilute to 1 L. Let settle, and draw off the clear liquid.


--- PAGE 1323 ---
TeamLRN
8-93
AQUEOUS SOLUBILITY AND HENRY’S LAW CONSTANTS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS (continued)
10. Riddick, J. A., Bunger, W. B., and Sakano, T. K., Organic Solvents, Fourth Edition, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1986.
11. Mackay, D., Shiu, W. Y., and Ma, K. C., Illustrated Handbook of Physical-Chemical Properties and Environmental Fate for Organic Chemi-
cals, Vol. I, Lewis Publishers/CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1992.
12. Mackay, D., Shiu, W. Y., and Ma, K. C., Illustrated Handbook of Physical-Chemical Properties and Environmental Fate for Organic Chemi-
cals, Vol. II, Lewis Publishers/CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1992.
13. Mackay, D., Shiu, W. Y., and Ma, K. C., Illustrated Handbook of Physical-Chemical Properties and Environmental Fate for Organic Chemi-
cals, Vol. III, Lewis Publishers/CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1993.
14. Horvath, A. L., Halogenated Hydrocarbons, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1982.
15. Howard, P. H., Handbook of Environmental Fate and Exposure Data for Organic Chemicals, Vol. I, Lewis Publishers/CRC Press, Boca
Raton, FL, 1989.
16. Howard, P. H., Handbook of Environmental Fate and Exposure Data for Organic Chemicals, Vol. II, Lewis Publishers/CRC Press, Boca
Raton, FL, 1990.
17. Banergee, S., Yalkowsky, S. H., and Valvani, S. C., Environ. Sci. Technol., 14, 1227, 1980.
18. Gevantman, L., in CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 84th Edition, p. 8-88, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2003.
19. Wilhelm, E., Battino, R., and Wilcock, R. J., Chem. Rev. 77, 219, 1977.
20. Stephenson, R. M., J. Chem. Eng. Data, 37, 80, 1992.
21. Stephenson, R. M., Stuart, J., and Tabak, M., J. Chem. Eng. Data, 29, 287, 1984.
22. Shiu, W.-Y., and Ma, K.-C, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 29, 41, 2000.
23. Lun, R., Varhanickova, D., Shiu, W.-Y., and Mackay, D., J. Chem. Eng. Data, 42, 951 (1997).
24. Huang, G.-L., Xiao, H., Chi, J., Shiu, W.-Y., and Mackay, D., J. Chem. Eng. Data, 45, 411, 2000.
25. Horvath, A. L., Getzen, F. W., and Maczynska, Z., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 28, 395, 2000 [IUPAC No. 67].
26. Dawson, R. M. C., Elliott, D. C., Elliott, W. H., and Jones, K. M., Data for Biochemical Research, Third Edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford,
1986.
27. Stephen, H., and Stephen, T., Solubilities of Organic and Inorganic Compounds, MacMillan, New York, 1963.
28. Shiu, W.-Y., and Mackay, D., J. Chem. Eng. Data, 42, 27, 1997.
29. Hinz, H.-J., ed., Thermodynamic Data for Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1986.
30. Budavari, S., ed., The Merck Index, Twelfth Edition, Merck & Co., Rahway, NJ, 1996.
31. Bamford, H. A., Poster, D. L., and Baker, J. E., J. Chem. Eng. Data, 45, 1069, 2000.
32. Lide, D. R., and Milne, G. W. A., Handbook of Data on Organic Compounds, Third Edition, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1994.
33. Apelblat, A., and Manzurola, E., J. Chem. Thermodynamics 21, 1005, 1989.
34. Apelblat, A., and Manzurola, E., J. Chem. Thermodynamics 22, 289, 1990.
35. Horvath, A. L., and Getzen, F. W.,  J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 28, 649, 1999 [IUPAC No. 68].
36. Sazonov, V. P., Marsh, K. N., and Hefter, G. T., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 29, 1165, 2000 [IUPAC No. 71].
37. Verbruggen, E. M. J., Hermens, J. L. M., and Tolls, J., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 29, 1435, 2000.
38. Sazonov, V. P., Shaw, D. G., and Marsh, K. N., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 31, 1, 2002 [IUPAC No. 77].
39. Sazonov, V. P., and Shaw, D. G.,  J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 31, 989, 2002 [IUPAC No. 78].
40. Yalkowsky, S. H., and He, Y., Handbook of Aqueous Solubility Data, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2003.
41. Shiu, W.-Y., and Ma, K.-C., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 29, 387, 2000.


--- PAGE 1372 ---
8-120
SOLVENTS FOR ULTRAVIOLET SPECTROPHOTOMETRY
This table lists some solvents commonly used for sample preparation for ultraviolet spectrophotometry. The properties given are:
λc: cutoff wavelength, below which the solvent absorption becomes excessive.
ε: dielectric constant (relative permittivity); the temperature in °C is given as a superscript.
tb: normal boiling point.
REFERENCES
1. Bruno, T. J., and Svoronos, P. D. N., CRC Handbook of Basic Tables for Chemical Analysis, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1989.
2. Landolt-Börnstein, Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in Science and Technology, New Series, IV/6, Static Dielectric Constants
of Pure Liquids and Binary Liquid Mixtures, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1991.
Name
λc/nm
ε
tb/°C
Acetic acid
260
6.2020
117.9
Acetone
330
21.0120
56.0
Acetonitrile
190
36.6420
81.6
Benzene
280
2.2820
80.0
2-Butanol
260
17.2620
99.5
Butyl acetate
254
5.0720
126.1
Carbon disulfide
380
2.6320
46
Carbon tetrachloride
265
2.2420
76.8
1-Chlorobutane
220
7.2820
78.6
Chloroform
245
4.8120
61.1
Cyclohexane
210
2.0220
80.7
1,2-Dichloroethane
226
10.4220
83.5
Dichloromethane
235
8.9325
40
Diethyl ether
218
4.2720
34.5
N,N-Dimethylacetamide
268
38.8521
165
N,N-Dimethylformamide
270
38.2520
153
Dimethyl sulfoxide
265
47.2420
189
1,4-Dioxane
215
2.2220
101.5
Ethanol
210
25.320
78.2
Ethyl acetate
255
6.0820
77.1
Ethylene glycol dimethyl ether
240
7.3024
85
Ethylene glycol monoethyl ether
210
13.3825
135
Ethylene glycol monomethyl ether
210
17.225
124.1
Glycerol
207
46.5320
290
Heptane
197
1.9220
98.5
Hexadecane
200
2.0520
286.8
Hexane
210
1.8920
68.7
Methanol
210
33.020
64.6
Methylcyclohexane
210
2.0220
100.9
Methyl ethyl ketone
330
18.5620
79.5
Methyl isobutyl ketone
335
13.1120
116.5
2-Methyl-1-propanol
230
17.9320
107.8
N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone
285
32.5520
202
Nitromethane
380
37.2720
101.1
Pentane
210
1.8420
36.0
Pentyl acetate
212
4.7920
149.2
1-Propanol
210
20.820
97.2
2-Propanol
210
20.1820
82.3
Pyridine
330
13.2620
115.2
Tetrachloroethylene
290
2.2730
121.3
Tetrahydrofuran
220
7.5222
65
Toluene
286
2.3823
110.6
1,1,2-Trichloro-1,2,2-trifluoroethane
231
2.4125
47.7
2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
215
1.9420
99.2
Water
191
80.1020
100.0
o-Xylene
290
2.5620
144.5
m-Xylene
290
2.3620
139.1
p-Xylene
290
2.2720
138.3


--- PAGE 1373 ---
TeamLRN
© 2000 CRC Press LLC
13C CHEMICAL SHIFTS OF USEFUL NMR SOLVENTS
The following table gives the expected carbon-13 chemical shifts, relative to tetramethylsilane,  for various useful NMR solvents. In some solvents,
slight changes can occur with change of concentration.2,3
REFERENCES
1. Bruno, T. J. and Svoronos, P. D. N., CRC Handbook of Basic Tables for Chemical Analysis, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1989.
2. Silverstein, R. M., Bassler, G. C., and Morrill, T. C., Spectrometric Identification of Organic Compounds, John Wiley & Sons, Now York, 1981.
3. Rahman, A. U., Nuclear Magnetic Resonance.  Basic Principles, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1986.
4. Pretsch, E., Clerc, T., Seibl, J., and Simon, W., Spectral Data for Structure Determination of Organic Compounds, Second Edition, Springer-
Verlag, Heidelberg, 1989.
Solvent
Formula
Chemical shift (ppm)
Acetic acid-d4
CD3COOD
20.0 (CD3) 205.8 (C=O)
Acetone
(CH3)2C=O
30.7 (CH3) 206.7 (C=O)
Acetone-d6
(CD3)2C=O
29.2 (CD3) 204.1 (C=O)
Acetonitrile-d3
CD3C;N
1.3 (CD3) 117.1 (C;N)
Benzene
C6H6
128.5
Benzene-d6
C6D6
128.4
Carbon disulfide
CS2
192.3
Carbon tetrachloride
CCl4
96.0
Chloroform
CHCl3
77.2
Chloroform-d3
CDC13
77.05
Cyclohexane-d12
C6D12
27.5
Dichloromethane-d2
CD2C12
53.6
Dimethylformamide-d7
(CD3)2NCDO
31 (CD3) 36 (CD3) 162.4 (C=O)
Dimethylsulfoxide-d6
(CD3)2S=O
39.6
Dioxane-d8
C4D3O2
67.4
Formic acid-d2
DCOOD
165.5
Methanol-d4
CD3OD
49.3
Nitromethane-d3
CD3NO2
57.3
Pyridine
C5H5N
123.6 (C3) 135.7 (C4) 149.8 (C2)
Pyridine-d5
C5D5N
123.9 (C3) 135.9 (C4) 150.2 (C2)
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane-d2
CDC12CDC12
75.5
Tetrahydrofuran-d8
C4D8O
25.8 (C2) 67.9 (C1)
Trichlorofluoromethane
CFC13
117.6


--- PAGE 1374 ---
MASS SPECTRAL PEAKS OF COMMON ORGANIC SOLVENTS
The strongest peaks in the mass spectra of 200 important solvents are listed in this table. The e/m value for each peak is followed by the relative
intensity in parentheses, with the strongest peak assigned an intensity of 100. The peaks for each compound are listed in order of decreasing intensity.
Solvents are listed in alphabetical order by common name.
Data on the physical properties of the same compounds may be found in Section 15 in the table “Properties of Common Laboratory Solvents”.
REFERENCES
1. NIST/EPA/NIH Mass Spectral Database, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, 20899.
2. Lide, D.R., and Milne, G.W.A., Editors, Handbook of Data on Organic Compounds, Third Edition, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1994. (Also
available as a CD ROM database.)


--- PAGE 1375 ---
TeamLRN
8-124
MASS SPECTRAL PEAKS OF COMMON ORGANIC SOLVENTS (continued)
Compound
e/m (intensity)
Acetal (1,1-Diethoxyethane)
44(100)
43(92)
29(77)
31(76)
45(74)
27(52)
72(48)
73(23)
28(17)
46(15)
Acetic acid
43(100)
45(87)
60(57)
15(42)
42(14)
29(13)
14(13)
28(7)
18(6)
16(6)
Acetone
43(100)
15(34)
58(23)
27(9)
14(9)
42(8)
26(7)
29(5)
28(5)
39(4)
Acetonitrile
41(100)
40(46)
39(13)
14(9)
38(6)
28(4)
26(4)
25(3)
42(2)
27(2)
Acetylacetone
43(100)
85(31)
100(20)
27(12)
42(10)
29(10)
41(7)
39(7)
31(5)
26(5)
Acrylonitrile
53(100)
26(85)
52(79)
51(34)
27(13)
50(8)
25(7)
38(5)
54(3)
37(3)
Adiponitrile
41(100)
68(50)
54(42)
40(21)
55(20)
27(17)
39(16)
28(13)
52(7)
42(6)
Allyl alcohol
57(100)
31(34)
29(32)
28(31)
58(25)
39(22)
27(20)
30(16)
32(14)
26(11)
Allylamine
30(100)
56(80)
28(76)
57(33)
39(21)
29(20)
27(18)
26(13)
41(8)
18(8)
2-Aminoisobutanol
58(100)
41(18)
18(17)
42(13)
28(11)
56(10)
30(10)
29(8)
43(6)
59(5)
Benzal chloride
125(100)
127(32)
160(14)
89(13)
162(9)
63(9)
126(8)
62(7)
105(5)
39(5)
Benzaldehyde
51(100)
77(81)
50(55)
106(44)
105(43)
52(26)
78(16)
39(13)
27(10)
74(8)
Benzene
78(100)
77(20)
52(19)
51(17)
50(15)
39(12)
79(6)
76(5)
74(4)
38(4)
Benzonitrile
103(100)
76(34)
50(13)
104(9)
75(7)
51(7)
77(5)
52(4)
39(4)
74(3)
Benzyl chloride
91(100)
126(20)
65(14)
92(9)
39(9)
63(8)
128(6)
45(6)
89(5)
125(3)
Bromochloromethane
49(100)
130(67)
128(52)
51(31)
93(23)
81(20)
79(20)
95(17)
132(16)
47(8)
Bromoform (Tribromomethane)
173(100)
171(50)
175(49)
93(22)
91(22)
79(18)
81(17)
94(13)
92(13)
254(11)
Butyl acetate
43(100)
56(34)
41(17)
27(16)
29(15)
73(11)
61(10)
28(7)
55(6)
39(6)
Butyl alcohol
31(100)
56(81)
41(62)
43(60)
27(50)
42(31)
29(31)
28(17)
39(16)
55(12)
sec-Butyl alcohol
45(100)
31(22)
27(22)
59(20)
29(18)
43(13)
41(12)
44(8)
18(8)
28(5)
tert-Butyl alcohol
59(100)
31(33)
41(22)
43(18)
29(13)
27(11)
57(10)
42(4)
60(3)
28(3)
Butylamine
30(100)
73(10)
28(5)
41(3)
27(3)
18(3)
44(2)
42(2)
31(2)
29(2)
tert-Butylamine
58(100)
41(21)
42(15)
18(9)
30(8)
15(8)
39(7)
57(6)
28(6)
59(4)
Butyl methyl ketone
43(100)
58(60)
57(17)
100(16)
29(15)
41(13)
85(8)
27(8)
71(7)
59(5)
p-tert-Butyltoluene
133(100)
105(38)
41(23)
148(18)
93(16)
91(14)
115(13)
134(11)
39(11)
116(10)
γ-Butyrolactone
28(100)
42(74)
29(48)
27(33)
41(27)
56(25)
86(24)
26(18)
85(10)
39(10)
Caprolactam
55(100)
113(87)
30(81)
56(66)
84(60)
85(57)
42(51)
41(33)
28(26)
43(17)
Carbon disulfide
76(100)
32(22)
44(17)
78(9)
38(6)
28(5)
77(3)
64(1)
46(1)
39(1)
Carbon tetrachloride
117(100)
119(98)
121(31)
82(24)
47(23)
84(16)
35(14)
49(8)
28(8)
36(6)
1-Chloro-1,1-difluoroethane
65(100)
45(31)
85(14)
31(10)
64(8)
44(7)
35(6)
26(6)
87(5)
81(4)
Chlorobenzene
112(100)
77(63)
114(33)
51(29)
50(14)
75(8)
113(7)
78(5)
76(5)
28(4)
Chloroform
83(100)
85(64)
47(35)
35(19)
48(16)
49(12)
87(10)
37(6)
50(5)
84(4)
Chloropentafluoroethane
85(100)
69(61)
31(38)
87(32)
50(17)
35(8)
119(6)
66(4)
100(3)
47(3)
Cumene (Isopropylbenzene)
105(100)
120(25)
77(13)
51(12)
79(10)
106(9)
39(9)
27(8)
103(6)
91(5)
Cyclohexane
56(100)
84(71)
41(70)
27(37)
55(36)
39(35)
42(30)
69(23)
28(18)
43(14)
Cyclohexanol
57(100)
44(68)
41(68)
39(51)
32(40)
43(38)
31(32)
42(22)
67(18)
82(16)
Cyclohexanone
55(100)
42(85)
41(34)
27(33)
98(31)
39(27)
69(26)
70(20)
43(14)
28(14)
Cyclohexylamine
56(100)
43(23)
28(17)
99(10)
70(8)
57(6)
30(6)
93(5)
54(4)
41(4)
Cyclopentane
42(100)
70(30)
55(29)
41(29)
39(22)
27(15)
40(7)
29(5)
28(4)
43(3)
Cyclopentanone
55(100)
28(50)
84(42)
41(38)
56(29)
27(24)
39(19)
42(15)
26(9)
29(7)
p-Cymene (1-Methyl-4-isopropyl-
  benzene)
119(100)
 91(42)
134(33)
39(27)
41(20)
117(18)
65(18)
77(17)
27(16)
120(15)
cis-Decalin
67(100)
81(87)
41(81)
138(67)
96(62)
82(62)
39(50)
55(45)
27(44)
95(42)
trans-Decalin
41(100)
68(91)
67(88)
82(67)
27(65)
96(61)
95(55)
138(51)
81(51)
29(51)


--- PAGE 1376 ---
8-125
MASS SPECTRAL PEAKS OF COMMON ORGANIC SOLVENTS (continued)
Compound
e/m (intensity)
Diacetone alcohol
43(100)
59(41)
58(17)
101(10)
41(9)
31(9)
83(6)
56(6)
55(6)
29(6)
1,2-Dibromoethane
27(100)
107(77)
109(72)
26(24)
28(10)
81(5)
79(5)
25(5)
95(4)
93(4)
Dibromofluoromethane
111(100)
113(98)
192(29)
43(16)
41(16)
190(15)
194(14)
81(9)
79(9)
122(7)
Dibromomethane
174(100)
93(96)
95(84)
172(53)
176(50)
91(11)
81(9)
79(9)
94(5)
65(5)
1,2-Dibromotetrafluoroethane
179(100)
 181(97)
129(34)
131(33)
100(17)
31(13)
260(12)
50(8)
69(7)
262(6)
Dibutylamine
86(100)
72(52)
30(48)
44(40)
29(31)
57(24)
41(21)
73(15)
28(15)
43(13)
o-Dichlorobenzene
146(100)
 148(64)
 111(38)
75(23)
113(12)
74(12)
50(11)
150(10)
73(9)
147(7)
1,1-Dichloroethane
  (Ethylidene dichloride)
63(100)
27(71)
65(31)
26(19)
83(11)
85(7)
61(7)
35(6)
98(5)
62(5)
1,2-Dichloroethane
  (Ethylene dichloride)
62(100)
27(91)
49(40)
64(32)
26(31)
63(19)
98(14)
51(13)
61(12)
100(9)
1,1-Dichloroethylene
61(100)
96(61)
98(38)
63(32)
26(16)
60(15)
62(7)
25(7)
100(6)
35(6)
cis-1,2-Dichloroethylene
61(100)
96(73)
98(47)
63(32)
26(30)
60(21)
25(13)
35(12)
62(9)
100(8)
trans-1,2-Dichloroethylene
61(100)
96(67)
98(43)
26(34)
63(32)
60(24)
25(15)
62(10)
100(7)
47(7)
Dichloroethyl ether
93(100)
63(74)
27(38)
95(32)
65(24)
31(9)
49(4)
28(4)
94(3)
62(3)
Dichloromethane
  (Methylene chloride)
49(100)
84(64)
86(39)
51(31)
47(14)
48(8)
88(6)
50(3)
85(2)
83(2)
1,2-Dichloropropane
63(100)
62(71)
27(57)
41(49)
39(32)
65(31)
76(27)
64(25)
49(13)
77(12)
1,2-Dichlorotetrafluoroethane
85(100)
135(52)
87(33)
137(17)
101(9)
31(9)
103(6)
100(6)
50(5)
69(4)
Diethanolamine
30(100)
74(82)
28(77)
56(69)
18(50)
42(46)
29(36)
27(34)
45(30)
43(19)
Diethylamine
30(100)
58(81)
44(28)
73(18)
29(18)
28(17)
72(12)
42(11)
27(11)
59(4)
Diethyl carbonate
29(100)
45(70)
31(53)
27(39)
91(24)
28(15)
63(11)
26(10)
30(6)
43(5)
Diethylene glycol
45(100)
75(23)
31(20)
44(16)
27(14)
76(12)
29(12)
43(11)
42(9)
41(4)
Diethylene glycol dimethyl
  ether (Diglyme)
59(100)
58(43)
31(34)
29(32)
45(28)
28(19)
89(15)
43(9)
27(5)
60(4)
Diethylene glycol monoethyl
  ether (Carbitol)
45(100)
59(56)
72(37)
73(22)
60(14)
31(13)
75(11)
44(9)
104(8)
103(7)
Diethylene glycol monoethyl
  ether acetate
43(100)
29(51)
31(42)
45(40)
59(24)
72(18)
44(10)
73(9)
42(9)
30(6)
Diethylene glycol monomethyl
  ether
45(100)
31(42)
59(41)
29(38)
28(32)
58(21)
43(14)
27(13)
44(11)
32(10)
Diethylenetriamine
44(100)
73(59)
30(35)
19(18)
56(16)
28(16)
27(16)
42(11)
99(8)
43(8)
Diethyl ether
31(100)
29(63)
59(40)
27(35)
45(33)
74(23)
15(17)
43(9)
28(9)
26(9)
Diisobutyl ketone (Isovalerone)
57(100)
85(82)
41(46)
43(39)
58(33)
28(30)
26(30)
39(22)
42(12)
142(11)
Diisopropyl ether
45(100)
43(39)
87(15)
41(12)
59(10)
27(8)
39(4)
69(3)
42(3)
31(3)
N,N-Dimethylacetamide
44(100)
87(69)
43(46)
45(23)
42(19)
72(15)
15(11)
30(8)
28(5)
88(4)
Dimethylamine
44(100)
45(81)
18(32)
28(30)
43(19)
42(15)
15(9)
46(5)
41(5)
27(5)
Dimethyl disulfide
94(100)
45(63)
79(59)
46(38)
47(26)
15(18)
48(14)
61(12)
64(11)
96(9)
N,N-Dimethylformamide
73(100)
44(86)
42(36)
30(22)
28(20)
29(8)
43(7)
72(6)
58(5)
74(4)
Dimethyl sulfoxide
63(100)
78(70)
15(40)
45(35)
29(16)
61(13)
46(12)
31(11)
48(10)
47(10)
1,4-Dioxane
28(100)
29(37)
88(31)
58(24)
31(17)
15(17)
27(15)
30(13)
43(11)
26(9)
1,3-Dioxolane
73(100)
29(56)
44(53)
45(28)
28(21)
43(20)
27(13)
31(7)
74(5)
42(3)
Dipentene
68(100)
93(50)
67(44)
94(22)
39(22)
107(18)
92(18)
53(18)
136(16)
79(16)
Epichlorohydrin
57(100)
27(39)
29(32)
49(25)
31(22)
62(18)
28(16)
92(1)


--- PAGE 1377 ---
TeamLRN
8-126
MASS SPECTRAL PEAKS OF COMMON ORGANIC SOLVENTS (continued)
Compound
e/m (intensity)
Ethanolamine (Glycinol)
30(100)
18(30)
28(15)
42(7)
31(6)
17(6)
61(5)
15(5)
43(3)
29(3)
Ethyl acetate
43(100)
29(46)
27(33)
45(32)
61(28)
28(25)
42(18)
73(11)
88(10)
70(10)
Ethyl acetoacetate
43(100)
29(24)
88(18)
28(16)
85(14)
27(12)
42(11)
60(9)
130(6)
45(6)
Ethyl alcohol
31(100)
45(44)
46(18)
27(18)
29(15)
43(14)
30(6)
42(3)
19(3)
14(3)
Ethylamine
30(100)
28(32)
44(20)
45(19)
27(13)
15(10)
42(9)
29(8)
41(5)
40(5)
Ethylbenzene
91(100)
106(31)
51(14)
39(10)
77(8)
65(8)
105(7)
92(7)
78(7)
27(6)
Ethyl bromide (Bromoethane)
108(100)
110(97)
29(62)
27(51)
28(35)
26(14)
93(6)
32(6)
95(5)
81(5)
Ethyl chloride (Cloroethane)
64(100)
28(91)
29(84)
27(75)
66(32)
26(28)
49(25)
51(8)
63(6)
65(4)
Ethylene carbonate
29(100)
44(62)
43(54)
88(40)
30(16)
28(11)
45(7)
58(6)
42(6)
73(4)
Ethylenediamine (1,2-Ethane-
  diamine)
30(100)
18(13)
42(6)
43(5)
27(5)
44(4)
29(4)
17(4)
15(4)
41(3)
Ethylene glycol
31(100)
33(35)
29(13)
32(11)
43(6)
27(5)
28(4)
62(3)
30(3)
44(2)
Ethylene glycol diethyl ether
31(100)
59(71)
29(58)
45(43)
27(33)
74(27)
43(15)
15(14)
28(12)
44(10)
Ethylene glycol dimethyl ether
45(100)
60(13)
29(13)
90(7)
58(6)
31(5)
28(5)
43(4)
59(3)
46(2)
Ethylene glycol monobutyl ether
57(100)
45(38)
29(35)
41(31)
87(16)
27(12)
56(11)
31(9)
75(7)
28(7)
Ethylene glycol monoethyl ether
  (Cellosolve)
31(100)
29(52)
59(50)
27(27)
45(26)
72(14)
43(14)
15(14)
28(8)
26(6)
Ethylene glycol monoethyl
  ether acetate
43(100)
31(34)
59(31)
72(28)
44(25)
29(24)
45(12)
27(11)
15(11)
87(7)
Ethylene glycol monomethyl ether
45(100)
31(15)
29(14)
28(11)
47(9)
76(6)
43(6)
58(4)
46(4)
27(4)
Ethylene glycol monomethyl ether
   acetate
43(100)
45(48)
58(42)
29(10)
42(4)
31(4)
73(3)
27(3)
59(2)
26(2)
Ethyl formate
31(100)
28(73)
27(51)
29(38)
45(34)
26(17)
74(11)
43(9)
47(8)
56(4)
Furan
68(100)
39(64)
40(9)
38(9)
42(6)
29(6)
37(5)
69(4)
34(2)
67(1)
Furfural
39(100)
96(55)
95(52)
38(38)
29(35)
37(29)
40(11)
97(9)
50(7)
42(7)
Furfuryl alcohol
98(100)
41(65)
39(59)
81(55)
53(53)
97(51)
42(49)
69(39)
70(36)
29(28)
Glycerol
61(100)
43(90)
31(57)
44(54)
29(38)
18(32)
27(12)
42(11)
60(10)
45(10)
Heptane
43(100)
41(56)
29(49)
57(47)
27(46)
71(45)
56(27)
42(26)
39(23)
70(18)
1-Heptanol
41(100)
70(87)
56(86)
31(78)
43(72)
29(70)
55(67)
27(65)
42(54)
69(41)
Hexane
57(100)
43(78)
41(77)
29(61)
27(57)
56(45)
42(39)
39(27)
28(16)
86(14)
1-Hexanol (Caproyl alcohol)
56(100)
43(78)
31(74)
41(71)
27(64)
29(59)
55(58)
42(53)
39(37)
69(27)
Hexylene glycol
59(100)
43(61)
56(25)
45(17)
41(16)
57(13)
42(13)
85(11)
61(10)
31(10)
Hexyl methyl ketone
43(100)
58(79)
41(56)
59(52)
71(49)
27(46)
29(36)
39(27)
57(18)
55(17)
Isobutyl acetate
43(100)
56(26)
73(15)
41(10)
29(5)
71(3)
57(3)
39(3)
27(3)
86(2)
Isobutyl alcohol
43(100)
33(73)
31(72)
41(66)
42(60)
27(43)
29(18)
39(17)
28(8)
74(6)
Isobutylamine
30(100)
28(9)
41(6)
73(5)
27(5)
39(4)
29(3)
15(3)
58(2)
56(2)
Isopentyl acetate
43(100)
70(49)
55(38)
61(15)
42(15)
41(14)
27(12)
87(11)
29(10)
73(9)
Isophorone
82(100)
39(20)
138(17)
54(13)
27(12)
41(10)
53(8)
83(7)
29(7)
55(6)
Isopropyl acetate
43(100)
61(17)
41(14)
87(9)
59(8)
27(8)
42(7)
39(4)
45(3)
44(2)
Isopropyl alcohol
45(100)
43(19)
27(17)
29(12)
41(7)
31(6)
19(6)
42(5)
44(4)
59(3)
Isoquinoline
129(100)
102(26)
51(20)
128(18)
50(11)
130(10)
75(10)
76(9)
103(8)
74(7)
d-Limonene (Citrene)
68(100)
93(50)
67(49)
41(22)
94(21)
79(21)
39(21)
136(20)
53(19)
121(16)
2,6-Lutidine (2,6-Dimethyl-
  pyridine)
107(100)
39(39)
106(29)
66(22)
92(18)
65(18)
38(12)
27(11)
79(9)
63(9)


--- PAGE 1378 ---
8-127
MASS SPECTRAL PEAKS OF COMMON ORGANIC SOLVENTS (continued)
Compound
e/m (intensity)
Mesitylene (1,3,5-Trimethyl-
  benzene)
105(100)
 120(64)
119(15)
77(13)
39(11)
106(9)
91(9)
51(8)
27(7)
121(6)
Mesityl oxide
55(100)
83(89)
43(73)
29(42)
98(36)
39(32)
27(28)
53(11)
41(10)
56(5)
Methyl acetate
43(100)
74(52)
28(38)
42(19)
59(17)
44(8)
32(8)
29(6)
31(4)
75(2)
Methylal (Dimethoxymethane)
45(100)
75(61)
29(59)
31(13)
30(6)
15(6)
47(5)
76(2)
46(2)
44(2)
Methyl alcohol
31(100)
29(72)
32(67)
15(42)
28(12)
14(10)
30(9)
13(6)
12(3)
16(2)
Methylamine
30(100)
31(87)
28(56)
29(19)
32(15)
15(12)
27(9)
Methyl benzoate
105(100)
77(81)
51(45)
136(24)
50(18)
106(8)
78(6)
28(6)
39(5)
27(5)
Methylcyclohexane
83(100)
55(82)
41(60)
98(44)
42(35)
56(30)
27(29)
39(27)
69(23)
70(22)
Methyl ethyl ketone
43(100)
72(24)
29(19)
27(12)
57(7)
42(5)
26(4)
28(3)
44(2)
39(2)
N-Methylformamide
59(100)
30(54)
28(34)
29(13)
58(8)
15(7)
60(3)
41(3)
27(3)
31(2)
Methyl formate
31(100)
29(63)
32(34)
60(28)
30(7)
28(7)
44(2)
18(2)
61(1)
59(1)
Methyl iodide (Iodomethane)
142(100)
127(38)
141(14)
15(13)
139(5)
140(4)
128(3)
14(1)
13(1)
71(0)
Methyl isobutyl ketone
43(100)
58(84)
29(65)
41(56)
57(44)
27(42)
39(31)
85(19)
100(14)
42(14)
Methyl isopentyl ketone
43(100)
58(34)
27(14)
41(13)
15(13)
57(11)
39(9)
71(8)
59(8)
29(8)
2-Methylpentane
43(100)
42(53)
41(35)
27(31)
71(29)
39(20)
29(18)
57(11)
15(10)
70(7)
4-Methyl-2-pentanol
45(100)
43(47)
69(30)
41(27)
27(19)
39(13)
29(12)
87(11)
84(10)
57(10)
Methyl pentyl ketone
43(100)
58(60)
71(14)
41(11)
27(11)
59(9)
39(8)
29(8)
42(5)
114(4)
Methyl propyl ketone
43(100)
41(17)
86(12)
42(12)
27(11)
39(8)
71(7)
58(7)
45(7)
44(3)
N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone
99(100)
44(89)
98(80)
42(60)
41(38)
43(17)
28(17)
71(13)
39(11)
70(10)
Morpholine
57(100)
29(100)
87(69)
28(69)
30(38)
56(33)
86(28)
31(28)
27(12)
15(7)
Nitrobenzene
77(100)
51(59)
123(42)
50(25)
30(15)
65(14)
39(10)
93(9)
74(7)
78(6)
Nitroethane
29(100)
30(12)
28(11)
26(9)
27(8)
43(5)
41(5)
14(5)
15(3)
46(2)
Nitromethane
30(100)
61(64)
46(39)
28(30)
45(8)
27(8)
44(7)
29(7)
60(5)
43(4)
1-Nitropropane
43(100)
27(93)
41(90)
39(34)
30(25)
44(20)
42(20)
26(20)
28(13)
54(12)
2-Nitropropane
43(100)
41(73)
27(71)
39(30)
30(18)
15(11)
42(9)
28(8)
26(8)
38(6)
Octane
43(100)
57(30)
85(25)
41(25)
71(19)
29(17)
56(14)
70(10)
42(10)
27(10)
1-Octanol
41(100)
56(85)
43(82)
55(81)
31(69)
27(69)
29(68)
42(62)
70(53)
69(48)
Pentachloroethane
167(100)
165(91)
117(90)
119(89)
83(58)
169(54)
130(43)
132(42)
60(40)
85(37)
Pentamethylene glycol
  (1,5-Pentanediol)
31(100)
56(85)
41(67)
57(59)
55(51)
44(45)
29(37)
43(31)
68(29)
27(26)
Pentane
43(100)
42(55)
41(45)
27(42)
29(26)
39(19)
57(13)
28(9)
15(9)
72(8)
1-Pentanol (Amyl alcohol)
42(100)
70(72)
55(65)
41(56)
31(47)
29(41)
27(26)
57(22)
28(22)
43(21)
Pentyl acetate (Amyl acetate)
43(100)
70(90)
42(52)
28(51)
61(50)
55(41)
73(21)
41(20)
29(14)
69(11)
2-Picoline (2-Methylpyridine)
93(100)
66(41)
39(31)
92(20)
78(19)
51(19)
65(16)
38(13)
50(12)
52(11)
α-Pinene
93(100)
92(30)
39(24)
41(23)
77(22)
91(21)
27(21)
79(18)
121(13)
53(10)
β-Pinene
93(100)
41(64)
69(47)
39(33)
27(31)
79(20)
77(18)
53(14)
94(13)
91(13)
Piperidine (Hexahydropyridine)
84(100)
85(53)
56(46)
57(43)
28(41)
29(37)
44(34)
42(30)
30(30)
43(25)
Propanenitrile
28(100)
54(63)
26(20)
27(17)
52(11)
55(10)
51(9)
15(9)
53(7)
25(7)
Propyl acetate
43(100)
61(19)
31(18)
27(15)
42(11)
73(9)
41(9)
29(9)
59(5)
39(5)
Propyl alcohol
31(100)
27(19)
29(18)
59(11)
42(9)
60(7)
41(7)
28(7)
43(3)
32(3)
Propylamine
30(100)
28(13)
59(8)
27(7)
41(5)
42(3)
39(3)
29(3)
26(3)
18(3)
Propylbenzene
91(100)
120(21)
92(10)
38(10)
65(9)
78(6)
51(6)
27(5)
63(4)
105(3)
1,2-Propylene glycol
45(100)
18(46)
29(21)
43(19)
31(18)
27(17)
28(11)
19(8)
44(6)
61(5)


--- PAGE 1379 ---
TeamLRN
8-128
MASS SPECTRAL PEAKS OF COMMON ORGANIC SOLVENTS (continued)
Compound
e/m (intensity)
Pseudocumene (1,2,4-Trimethyl-
  benzene)
105(100)
120(56)
119(17)
77(15)
39(15)
51(11)
91(10)
27(10)
106(9)
79(7)
Pyridine
79(100)
52(62)
51(31)
50(19)
78(11)
53(7)
39(7)
80(6)
27(3)
77(2)
Pyrrole
67(100)
41(58)
39(58)
40(51)
28(42)
38(20)
37(12)
66(7)
68(5)
27(3)
Pyrrolidine
43(100)
28(52)
70(33)
71(26)
42(22)
41(20)
27(16)
39(15)
29(10)
30(9)
2-Pyrrolidone
85(100)
42(43)
41(36)
28(33)
30(29)
56(16)
84(14)
40(12)
27(12)
29(9)
Quinoline
129(100)
51(28)
76(25)
128(24)
44(24)
50(20)
32(19)
75(18)
74(12)
103(11)
Styrene
104(100)
103(41)
78(32)
51(28)
77(23)
105(12)
50(12)
52(11)
39(11)
102(10)
Sulfolane
41(100)
28(94)
56(82)
55(72)
120(37)
27(32)
39(19)
29(17)
26(11)
48(5)
α-Terpinene
121(100)
93(85)
136(43)
91(40)
77(34)
39(33)
27(33)
79(27)
41(26)
43(18)
1,1,1,2-Tetrachloro-2,2-
  difluoroethane
167(100)
169(96)
117(85)
119(82)
171(31)
85(29)
121(26)
82(14)
47(14)
101(13)
Tetrachloro-1,2-difluoroethane
101(100)
 103(64)
167(54)
169(52)
117(19)
119(18)
171(17)
105(11)
31(11)
132(9)
1,1,1,2-Tetrachloroethane
131(100)
133(96)
117(76)
119(73)
95(34)
135(31)
121(23)
97(23)
61(19)
60(18)
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane
83(100)
85(63)
95(11)
87(10)
168(8)
133(8)
131(8)
96(8)
61(8)
60(8)
Tetrachloroethylene
166(100)
164(82)
131(71)
129(71)
168(45)
94(38)
47(31)
96(24)
133(20)
59(17)
Tetraethylene glycol
45(100)
89(10)
44(8)
43(6)
31(6)
29(6)
27(6)
101(5)
75(5)
28(5)
Tetrahydrofuran
42(100)
41(52)
27(33)
72(29)
71(27)
39(24)
43(22)
29(22)
40(13)
15(10)
1,2,3,4-Tetrahydronaphthalene
104(100)
132(53)
91(43)
51(17)
39(17)
131(15)
117(15)
115(14)
78(13)
77(13)
Tetrahydropyran
41(100)
28(64)
56(57)
45(57)
29(51)
27(49)
85(47)
86(42)
39(28)
55(23)
Tetramethylsilane
73(100)
43(14)
45(12)
74(8)
29(7)
15(5)
75(4)
44(4)
42(4)
31(4)
Toluene
91(100)
92(73)
39(20)
65(14)
63(11)
51(11)
50(7)
27(6)
93(5)
90(5)
o-Toluidine
106(100)
 107(83)
77(17)
79(13)
39(12)
53(10)
52(10)
54(9)
51(9)
28(9)
Triacetin
43(100)
103(44)
145(34)
116(17)
115(13)
44(10)
86(9)
28(8)
73(7)
42(7)
Tributylamine
142(100)
 100(19)
143(11)
29(8)
185(7)
57(6)
44(6)
41(6)
30(5)
86(4)
1,1,1-Trichloroethane
97(100)
99(64)
61(58)
26(31)
27(24)
117(19)
63(19)
119(18)
35(17)
62(11)
1,1,2-Trichloroethane
97(100)
83(95)
99(62)
85(60)
61(58)
26(23)
96(21)
63(19)
27(17)
98(15)
Trichloroethylene
95(100)
130(90)
132(85)
60(65)
97(64)
35(40)
134(27)
47(26)
62(21)
59(13)
Trichlorofluoromethane
101(100)
103(66)
66(13)
105(11)
35(11)
47(9)
31(8)
82(4)
68(4)
37(4)
1,1,2-Trichlorotrifluoroethane
101(100)
151(68)
103(64)
85(45)
31(45)
153(44)
35(20)
66(19)
47(18)
87(14)
Triethanolamine
118(100)
 56(69)
45(60)
42(56)
44(27)
43(25)
41(14)
116(8)
57(8)
86(7)
Triethylamine
86(100)
30(68)
58(37)
28(24)
29(23)
27(19)
44(18)
101(17)
42(16)
56(8)
Triethylene glycol
45(100)
58(11)
89(9)
31(8)
29(8)
75(7)
44(7)
43(7)
27(7)
28(5)
Triethyl phosphate
99(100)
81(71)
155(56)
82(45)
45(45)
109(44)
127(41)
43(24)
125(16)
111(14)
Trimethylamine
58(100)
59(47)
30(29)
42(26)
44(17)
15(14)
28(10)
18(10)
43(8)
57(7)
Trimethylene glycol
  (1,3-Propanediol)
28(100)
58(93)
31(76)
57(70)
29(40)
27(26)
45(24)
43(23)
19(18)
30(17)
Trimethyl phosphate
110(100)
109(35)
79(34)
95(25)
80(23)
15(20)
140(18)
47(10)
31(7)
139(5)
Veratrole
138(100)
95(65)
77(48)
123(44)
52(42)
41(33)
65(30)
51(29)
39(19)
63(17)
o-Xylene
91(100)
106(40)
39(21)
105(17)
51(17)
77(15)
27(12)
65(10)
92(8)
79(8)
m-Xylene
91(100)
106(65)
105(29)
39(18)
51(15)
77(14)
27(10)
92(8)
79(8)
78(8)
p-Xylene
91(100)
106(62)
105(30)
51(16)
39(16)
77(13)
27(11)
92(7)
78(7)
65(7)


--- PAGE 1425 ---
TeamLRN
9-45
DIPOLE MOMENTS
This table gives values of the electric dipole moment for about 800 molecules. When available, values determined by microwave spectroscopy,
molecular beam electric resonance, and other high-resolution spectroscopic techniques were selected. Otherwise, the values come from measurements
of the dielectric constant in the gas phase or, if these do not exist, in the liquid phase. Compounds are listed by molecular formula in Hill order;
compounds not containing carbon are listed first, followed by compounds containing carbon.
The dipole moment µ is given in debye units (D). The conversion factor to SI units is 1 D = 3.33564 × 10-30 C m.
Dipole moments of individual conformers (rotational isomers) are given when they have been measured. The conformers are designated as gauche,
trans, axial, etc. The meaning of these terms can be found in the references. In some cases an average value, obtained from measurements on the bulk
gas, is also given. Other information on molecules that have been studied by spectroscopy, such as the components of the dipole moment in the
molecular framework and the variation with vibrational state and isotopic species, is given in References 1 and 2.
When the accuracy of a value is explicitly stated (i.e., 1.234 ± 0.005), the stated uncertainty generally indicates two or three standard deviations.
When no uncertainty is given, the value may be assumed to be precise to a few units in the last decimal place. However, if more than three decimal
places are given, the exact interpretation of the final digits may require analysis of the vibrational averaging.
Values measured in the gas phase that are questionable because of undetermined error sources are indicated as approximate (≈). Values obtained
by liquid phase measurements, which sometimes have large errors because of association effects, are enclosed in brackets, e.g., [1.8].
REFERENCES
1. Nelson, R. D., Lide, D. R., and Maryott, A. A., Selected Values of Electric Dipole Moments for Molecules in the Gas Phase, Natl. Stand. Ref.
Data Ser. - Nat. Bur. Stnds. 10, 1967.
2. Landolt-Börnstein, Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in Science and Technology, New Series, II/6 (1974), II/14a (1982), II/14b
(1983), II/19c (1992), Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg.
3. Riddick, J. A., Bunger, W. B., and Sakano, T. K., Organic Solvents, Fourth Edition, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1986.
Mol. Form.
Name
µ/D
Compounds not containing carbon
AgBr
Silver(I) bromide
5.62 ± 0.03
AgCl
Silver(I) chloride
6.08 ± 0.06
AgF
Silver(I) fluoride
6.22 ± 0.30
AgI
Silver(I) iodide
4.55 ± 0.05
AlF
Aluminum monofluoride
1.53 ± 0.15
AsCl3
Arsenic(III) chloride
1.59 ± 0.08
AsF3
Arsenic(III) fluoride
2.59 ± 0.05
AsH3
Arsine
0.217 ± 0.003
BClH2
Chloroborane
0.75 ± 0.05
BF
Fluoroborane(1)
≈0.5
BF2H
Difluoroborane
0.971 ± 0.010
B4H10
Tetraborane
0.486 ± 0.002
B5H9
Pentaborane(9)
2.13 ± 0.04
B6H10
Hexaborane
2.50 ± 0.05
BaO
Barium oxide
7.954 ± 0.003
BaS
Barium sulfide
10.86 ± 0.02
BrCl
Bromine chloride
0.519 ± 0.004
BrF
Bromine fluoride
1.422 ± 0.016
BrF3Si
Bromotrifluorosilane
0.83 ± 0.01
BrF5
Bromine pentafluoride
1.51 ± 0.15
BrH
Hydrogen bromide
0.8272 ± 0.0003
BrH3Si
Bromosilane
1.319
BrI
Iodine bromide
0.726 ± 0.003
BrK
Potassium bromide
10.628 ± 0.001
BrLi
Lithium bromide
7.268 ± 0.001
BrNO
Nitrosyl bromide
≈1.8
BrNa
Sodium bromide
9.1183 ± 0.0006
BrO
Bromine monoxide
1.76 ± 0.04
BrO2
Bromine dioxide
2.8 ± 0.3
BrRb
Rubidium bromide
≈10.9
BrTl
Thallium(I) bromide
4.49 ± 0.05
CaCl
Calcium monochloride
≈3.6
ClCs
Cesium chloride
10.387 ± 0.004
ClF
Chlorine fluoride
0.888061
ClFO3
Perchloryl fluoride
0.023 ± 0.001
ClF3
Chlorine trifluoride
0.6 ± 0.10
Mol. Form.
Name
µ/D
ClF3Si
Chlorotrifluorosilane
0.636 ± 0.004
ClGeH3
Chlorogermane
2.13 ± 0.02
ClH
Hydrogen chloride
1.1086 ± 0.0003
ClHO
Hypochlorous acid
≈1.3
ClH3Si
Chlorosilane
1.31 ± 0.01
ClI
Iodine chloride
1.24 ± 0.02
ClIn
Indium(I) chloride
3.79 ± 0.19
ClK
Potassium chloride
10.269 ± 0.001
ClLi
Lithium chloride
7.12887
ClNO2
Nitryl chloride
0.53
ClNS
Thionitrosyl chloride
1.87 ± 0.02
ClNa
Sodium chloride
9.00117
ClO
Chlorine oxide
1.297 ± 0.001
ClRb
Rubidium chloride
10.510 ± 0.005
ClTl
Thallium(I) chloride
4.54299
Cl2H2Si
Dichlorosilane
1.17 ± 0.02
Cl2OS
Thionyl chloride
1.45 ± 0.03
Cl2O2S
Sulfuryl chloride
1.81 ± 0.04
Cl2S
Sulfur dichloride
0.36 ± 0.01
Cl3FSi
Trichlorofluorosilane
0.49 ± 0.01
Cl3HSi
Trichlorosilane
0.86 ± 0.01
Cl3N
Nitrogen trichloride
0.39 ± 0.01
Cl3OP
Phosphorus(V) oxychloride
2.54 ± 0.05
Cl3P
Phosphorus(III) chloride
0.56 ± 0.02
CrO
Chromium monoxide
3.88 ± 0.13
CsF
Cesium fluoride
7.884 ± 0.001
CsNa
Cesium sodium
4.75 ± 0.20
CuF
Copper(I) fluoride
5.77 ± 0.29
CuO
Copper(II) oxide
4.5 ± 0.5
FGa
Gallium monofluoride
2.45 ± 0.05
FGeH3
Fluorogermane
2.33 ± 0.12
FH
Hydrogen fluoride
1.826178
FHO
Hypofluorous acid
2.23 ± 0.11
FH2N
Fluoramide
2.27 ± 0.18
FH3Si
Fluorosilane
1.2969 ± 0.0006
FI
Iodine fluoride
1.948 ± 0.020


--- PAGE 1645 ---
TeamLRN
10-167
ATOMIC AND MOLECULAR POLARIZABILITIES
Thomas M. Miller
The polarizability of an atom or molecule describes the response of the electron cloud to an external ﬁeld. The atomic or molecular energy shift
∆W due to an external electric ﬁeld E is proportional to E2 for external ﬁelds which are weak compared to the internal electric ﬁelds between the
nucleus and electron cloud. The electric dipole polarizability α is the constant of proportionality deﬁned by ∆W = -αE2/2. The induced electric
dipole moment is αE. Hyperpolarizabilities, coefﬁcients of higher powers of E, are less often required. Technically, the polarizability is a tensor
quantity but for spherically symmetric charge distributions reduces to a single number. In any case, an average polarizability is usually adequate in
calculations. Frequency-dependent or dynamic polarizabilities are needed for electric ﬁelds which vary in time, except for frequencies which are
much lower than electron orbital frequencies, where static polarizabilities sufﬁce. 
Polarizabilities for atoms and molecules in excited states are found to be larger than for ground states and may be positive or negative. Molecular
polarizabilities are very slightly temperature dependent since the size of the molecule depends on its rovibrational state. Only in the case of dihy-
drogen has this effect been studied enough to warrant consideration in Table 3. 
Polarizabilities are normally expressed in cgs units of cm3. Ground state polarizabilities are in the range of 10-24 cm3 = 1 Å3 and hence are often
given in Å3 units. Theorists tend to use atomic units of ao
3 where ao is the Bohr radius. The conversion is α(cm3) = 0.148184 × 10-24 × α(ao
3).
Polarizabilities are only recently encountered in SI units, C⋅m2/V = J/(V/m)2. The conversion from cgs units to SI units is α(C⋅m2/V) = 4πεo × 10-6
× α(cm3), where εo is the permittivity of free space in SI units and the factor 10-6 simply converts cm3 into m3. Thus, α(C⋅m2/V) = 1.11265 × 10-16
× α(cm3). Persons measuring excited state polarizabilities by optical methods tend to use units of MHz/(V/cm)2, where the energy shift, ∆W, is
expressed in frequency units with a factor of h understood. The polarizability is -2 ∆W/E2. The conversion into cgs units is α(cm3) = 5.95531 ×
10-16 × α[MHz/(V/cm)2]. 
The polarizability appears in many formulas for low-energy processes involving the valence electrons of atoms or molecules. These formulas are
given below in cgs units: the polarizability α is in cm3; masses m or µ are in grams; energies are in ergs; and electric charges are in esu, where e =
4.8032 × 10-10 esu. The symbol α(ν) denotes a frequency (ν) dependent polarizability, where α(ν) reduces to the static polarizability α for ν = 0.
For further information and references, see Miller, T. M., and Bederson, B., Advances in Atomic and Molecular Physics, 13, 1, 1977. Details on
polarizability-related interactions, especially in regard to hyperpolarizabilities and nonlinear optical phenomena, are given by Bogaard, M. P., and
Orr, B. J., in Physical Chemistry, Series Two, Vol. 2, Molecular Structure and Properties, Buckingham, A. D., Ed., Butterworths, London, 1975,
pp. 149-194. A tabulation of tensor and hyperpolarizabilities is included. The gas number density, n, in Table 1 is usually taken to be that of 1 atm
at 0°C in reporting experimental data. 
Table 1 Formulas Involving Polarizability 
Description
Formula
Remarks
Lorentz-Lorenz relation
For a gas of atoms or nonpolar molecules; the index of refraction 
is η(ν)
Refraction by polar molecules
The dipole moment is d, in esu.cm (= 10-18 D)
Dielectric constant 
(dimensionless)
From the Lorentz-Lorenz relation for the usual case of κ(ν) ≈ 1
Index of refraction 
(dimensionless)
From η3(ν) = κ(ν)
Diamagnetic susceptibility
From the approximation that the static polarizability is given by the 
variational formula α = (4/9ao)Σ(Niri
2)2; N is the number of 
electrons, me is the electron mass; a crude approximation is χm=(Ei/
4mec2)α, where Ei is the ionization energy 
Long-range electron- or ion-
molecule interaction energy
The target molecule polarizability is α
Ion mobility in a gas
This one formula is not in cgs units. Enter α in Å3 or 10-24 cm3 units 
and the reduced mass µ of the ion-molecule pair in amu. Classical 
limit; pure polarization potential
Langevin capture cross section 
The relative velocity of approach for an ion-molecule pair is νo; the 
target molecular polarizability is α and the reduced mass of the 
ion-molecule pair is µ 
Langevin reaction rate 
coefﬁcient
Collisional rate coefﬁcient for an ion-molecule reaction 
Rate coefﬁcient for polar 
molecules
The dipole moment of the neutral is d in esu⋅cm; the number c is 
a “locking factor” that depends on α and d, and is between 0 and 1 
α ν
π
η
ν
η
ν
( ) =
( ) −
( ) +






3
4
1
2
2
2
n
α ν
π
η
ν
η
ν
( ) +
=
( ) −
( ) +






d
kT
n
2
2
2
3
3
4
1
2
κ ν
π
α ν
( ) =
+
( )
1
4 n   
η ν
π
α ν
( ) =
+
( )
1
2 n   
χ
α
m
o
e
=
(
)
e
a N
m c
2
1 2
2
4
/ /
V r
e
r
( ) = −
2
4
2
α /
κ
αµ
= −
(
)
⋅
13 87
1 2
.
/
/ cm / V s
2
σ ν
π
ν
α µ
o
o
(
) = (
)(
)
2
1 2
e /
/
/
k
e
=
(
)
2
1 2
π α µ
/
/
k
e
cd
kT
d =
(
)
+
(
)
[
]
2
2
1 2
1 2
π
α µ
µπ
/
/
/
/


--- PAGE 1659 ---
TeamLRN
10-181
ATOMIC AND MOLECULAR POLARIZABILITIES (continued)
Note:  All polarizabilities in the tables are experimental values except those values marked by an asterisk (*), which indicates a calculated result.
The experimental polarizabilities are mostly determined by measurements of a dielectric constant or refractive index which are quite accurate
(0.5% or better).  However, one should treat many of the results with several percent of caution because of the age of the data and because some of
the results refer to optical frequencies rather than static.  Comments given with the references are intended to allow one to judge the degree of cau-
tion required.  Interested persons should consult these references.  In many cases, the reference given is to a theoretical paper in which the experi-
mental results are quoted.  These papers, noted in the References, contain valuable information on polarizability calculations and experimental data
which often includes the tensor components of the polarizability.
1,2-diethoxyethane
11.3
2†
C6H15N
triethylamine
13.1
2
13.38
27
dipropylamine
13.29
27
C7H4N2O2
p-cyanonitrobenzene
19.0
2
C7H5N
benzonitrile
12.5
2†
C7H7NO3
nitroanisole
15.7
2†
C7H8O
anisole
13.1
2†
C7H9NO
o-anisidine
14.2
2†
C7H10N2
1,1-methylphenylhydrazine
14.81
27
C7H14O
cyclohexyl methyl ether
13.4
2†
2,4-dimethyl-3-pentanone
13.5
15
C7H14O2
pentyl acetate
14.9
2
C8H4N2
p-dicyanobenzene
19.2
2
C8H6N2
quinoxaline
15.13
27
C8H8O
acetophenone
15.0
2
C8H8O2
2,5-dimethyl-1,4-benzoquinone
18.8
2
C8H10O
phenetole
14.9
2
C8H11N
N-dimethylaniline
16.2
2†
C8H12N2
1,1-ethylphenylhydrazine
16.62
27
C8H12O2
ethyl sorbate
17.2
2†
tetramethylcyclobutane-1,3-dione
18.6
2
C8H14O4
diethyl succinate
16.8
2†
C8H18O
butyl ether
17.2
2
C9H7N
quinoline
15.70
27
isoquinoline
16.43
27
C9H10O2
ethyl benzoate
16.9
2†
C9H21N
tripropylamine
18.87
27
C10H9N
α-naphthylamine
19.50
27
β-naphthylamine
19.73
27
2-methylquinoline
18.65
27
1-methylisoquinoline
18.28
27
C10H10Fe
ferrocene
17.1
26
C10H10N2
2,3-dimethylquinoxaline
18.70
27
C10H14BeO4
beryllium acetylacetonate
34.1
2
C11H8O
1-naphthaldehyde
19.75
27
2-naphthaldehyde
20.06
27
C12H8N2
phenazine
23.43
27
C12H9NO3
4-nitrodiphenyl ether
24.7
2†
C14H8O2
anthraquinone
24.46
27
C14H14O
di-p-tolyl ether
24.9
2†
C15H21AlO6
aluminum acetylacetonate
51.9
2
C15H21CrO6
chromium acetylacetonate
53.7
2
C15H21FeO6
ferric acetylacetonate
58.1
2
C20H28O8Th
thorium acetylacetonate
79.0
2
C60
buckminsterfullerene
76.5
24
79
31
Molecule
Name
Polarizability
Ref.


--- PAGE 1660 ---
10-182
ATOMIC AND MOLECULAR POLARIZABILITIES (continued)
REFERENCES
Kagawa, H., Ichimura, A., Kamka, N. A., and Mori, K., J. Mol. Structure (Theochem) 546, 127, 2001.  Parameters were developed for rapid
estimation of molecular polarizabilities; this paper contains references for the measured polarizabilities of 371 molecules.
1. McCullough, E. A., Jr., J. Chem. Phys., 63, 5050, 1975.  This calculation is for the parallel component, not the average polarizability.
2. Maryott, A. A., and Buckley, F., U. S. National Bureau of Standards Circular No. 537, 1953.  A tabulation of dipole moments, dielectric con-
stants, and molar refractions measured between 1910 and 1952, and used here to determine polarizabilities if no more recent result exists.
The polarizability is 3/(4πNo) times the molar polarization or molar refraction, where No is Avogadro’s number.  The value 3/(4πNo) =
0.3964308 x 10-24 cm3 was used for this conversion.  A dagger (†) following the reference number in the tables indicates that the polarizability
was derived from the molar refraction and hence may not include some low-frequency contributions to the static polarizability; these “static”
polarizabilities are therefore low by 1 to 30%.
3. Hirschfelder, J. O., Curtis, C. F., and Bird, R. B., Molecular Theory of Gases and Liquids, Wiley, New York, 1954, p. 950.  Fundamental
information on molecular polarizabilities.
4. Miller, T. M., and Bederson, B., Adv. At. Mol. Phys., 13, 1, 1977.  Review emphasizing atomic polarizabilities and measurement techniques.
The data quoted in Table 3 are accurate to 8 to 12%.
5. Kolos, W., and Wolniewicz, L., J. Chem. Phys., 46, 1426, 1967.  Highly accurate molecular hydrogen calculations.
6. Newell, A. C., and Baird, R. C., J. Appl. Phys., 36, 3751, 1965.  Highly accurate refractive index measurements at 47.7 GHz (essentially
static).
7. Jao, T. C., Beebe, N. H. F., Person, W. B., and Sabin, J. R., Chem. Phys. Lett., 26, 474, 1974.  Tensor polarizabilities, derivatives, and other
results are reported.
8. Orcutt, R. H., and Cole, R. H., J. Chem. Phys., 46, 697, 1967 (He, Ne, Ar, Kr, H2, N2); Sutter, H., and Cole, R. H., J. Chem. Phys., 52, 132,
1970 (CF3H, CFH3, CClF3, CClH3); Bose, T. K., and Cole, R. H., J. Chem. Phys., 52, 140, 1970 (CO2), and 54, 3829, 1971 (C2H4); Nelson, R.
D., and Cole, R. H., J. Chem. Phys., 54, 4033, 1971 (SF6, CClF3); Bose, T. K., Sochanski, J. S., and Cole, R. H., J. Chem. Phys., 57, 3592,
1972 (CH4, CF4); Kirouac, S., and Bose, T. K., J. Chem. Phys., 59, 3043, 1973 (N2O), and 64, 1580, 1976 (He).  Highly accurate dielectric
constant measurements.  These modern data give the most accurate polarizabilities available.  A criticism of the interpretation of these data in
the case of polar molecules is given in Ref. 20, p. 2905.
9. Huestis, D. L., Technical Report #MP 78-25, SRI International (project PYU 6158), Menlo Park, CA 94025.  Molar refractions for mercury-
chlorine compounds are analyzed.
10. Bounds, D. G., Clarke, J. H. R., and Hinchliffe, A., Chem. Phys. Lett., 45, 367, 1977.  Theoretical tensor polarizability for LiCl.
11. Kolker, H. J., and Karplus, M., J. Chem. Phys., 39, 2011, 1963.  Theoretical.
12. Cutschick, V. P., and McKoy, V., J. Chem. Phys., 58, 2397, 1973.  Theoretical tensor polarizabilities.
13. Gready, J. E., Bacskay, G. B., and Hush, N. S., Chem. Phys., 22, 141, 1977, and 23, 9, 1977.  Theoretical.
14. Amos, A. T., and Yoffe, J. A., J. Chem. Phys., 63, 4723, 1975.  Theoretical.
15. Stuart, H. A., Landolt-Börnstein Zahlenwerte and Funktionen, Vol. 1, Part 3, Eucken, A., and Hellwege, K. H., Eds., Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
1951, p. 511.  Tabulation of molecular polarizabilities.  Two misprints in the chemical symbols have been corrected.
16. Guella, T., Miller, T. M., Stockdale, J. A. D., Bederson, B., and Vuskovic, L., J. Chem. Phys., 94, 6857, 1991.  Beam measurements with
accuracies between 12-24%.
17. Marchese, F. T., and Jaff‚ H. H., Theoret. Chim. Acta (Berlin), 45, 241, 1977.  Theoretical and experimental tensor polarizabilities are tabu-
lated in this paper.
18. Applequist, J., Carl, J. R., and Fung, K.-K., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 94, 2952, 1972.  Excellent reference on the calculation of molecular polariz-
abilities, including extensive tables of tensor polarizabilities, both theoretical and experimental, at 589.3 nm wavelength.
19. Bridge, N. J., and Buckingham, A. D., Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), A295, 334, 1966.  Measured tensor polarizabilities at 633 nm wavelength.
20. Barnes, A. N. M., Turner, D. J., and Sutton, L. E., Trans. Faraday Soc., 67, 2902, 1971.  Dielectric constants yielding polarizabilities accurate
from 0.3-8%.
21. Knight, W. D., Clemenger, K., de Heer, W. A., and Saunders, W. A., Phys. Rev. B, 31, 2539, 1985.  These data probably correspond to a very
low internal temperature.
22. Tarnovsky, V., Bunimovicz, M., Vuskovic, L., Stumpf, B., and Bederson, B., J. Chem. Phys., 98, 3894, 1993.  These data correspond to inter-
nal temperatures 480-948 K.
23. Milani, P., Moullet, I., and de Heer, W. A., Phys. Rev. A, 42, 5150, 1990.  Beam measurements accurate to 11%.
24. Antoine, R., Dugourd, P., Rayane, D., Benichou, E., Broyer, M., Chandezon, F., and Guet, C., J. Chem. Phys. 110, 9771, 1999.
25. Aroney, M. J., and Pratten, S. J., J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 80, 1201, 1984.  Uncertainties in the range 1-3%.
26. Le Fevre, R. J. W., Murthy, D. S. N., and Saxby, J. D., Aust. J. Chem., 24, 1057, 1971.  Kerr effect.
27. No, K. T., Cho, K. H., Jhon, M. S., and Scheraga, H. A., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 115, 2005, 1993.  Theoretical; these results are quoted in numer-
ous valuable papers on calculated polarizabilities, e.g., Miller, K. J., and Savchik, J. A., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 101, 7206, 1979.
28. Schlecht, S., Schäfer, R., Woenckhaus, J., Becker, J. A.,  Chem. Phys. Lett. 246, 315, 1995.
29. Benichou, E., Antoine, R., Rayane, D., Vezin, B., Dalby, F. W., Dugourd, P., Ristori, C., Chandezon, F., Huber, B. A., Rocco, J. C., Blundell,
S. A., and Guet, C., Phys. Rev. A 59, R1, 1999.  
30. Antoine, R., Rayane, D., Allouche, A. R., Aubert-Frécon, M., Benichou, E., Dalby, F. W., Dugourd, P., Broyer, M., and Guet, C., J. Chem.
Phys. 110, 5568, 1999.  
31. Ballard, A., Bonin, K., and Louderback, J., J. Chem. Phys. 113, 5732, 2000.


--- PAGE 1714 ---
CHARACTERISTICS OF LASER SOURCES (continued)
Table 3
Temporal Characteristics of Lasers and Laser Systems
Pulse width
range
Form
Technique
(s)
Continuous wave
Excitation is continuous; resonator Q
   is held constant at some moderate value
∞
Pulsed
Excitation is pulsed; resonator Q is held
  constant at some moderate value
10–8–10–3
Q-Switched
Excitation is continuous or pulsed; resonator Q
  is switched from a very low value to a moderate value
10–8–10–6
Cavity dumped
Excitation is continuous or pulsed; resonator Q
   is switched from a very high value to a low value
10–7–10–5
Mode locked
Excitation is continuous or pulsed; phase or loss of
  the resonator modes is modulated at a rate related to
  the resonator transit time
10–12–10–9
TABLE 2
Classes, Types, and Representative Examples of Laser Sources
Representative
Nominal operating
Class
Type (characteristic)
example
wavelength (nm)
Method(s) of excitation
Gas
Atom, neutral (electronic transition)
Neon-Helium (Ne-He)
633
Glow discharge
Atom, ionic (electronic transition)
Argon (Ar+)
488
Arc discharge
Molecule, neutral (electronic transition)
Krypton fluoride (KrF)
248
Glow discharge; e-
  beam
Molecule, neutral (vibrational transition)
Carbon dioxide (CO2)
10600
Glow discharge; gas-
  dynamic flow
Molecule, neutral (rotational transition)
Methyl fluoride (CH3F)
496000
Laser pumping
Molecule, ionic (electronic transition)
Nitrogen ion (N2+)
420
E-beam
Liquid
Organic solvent (dye-chromophore)
Rhodamine dye (Rh6G)
580–610
Flashlamp; laser
  pumping
Organic solvent (rare earth chelate)
Europium:TTF
612
Flashlamp
Inorganic solvent (trivalent rare earth ion)
Neodymium:POCl4
1060
Flashlamp
Solid
Insulator, crystal (impurity)
Neodymium:YAG
1064
Flashlamp, arc lamp
Insulator, crystal (stoichiometric)
Neodymium:UP(NdP5O14)
1052
Flashlamp
Insulator, crystal (color center)
F2–:LiF
1120
Laser pumping
Insulator, amorphous (impurity)
Neodymium:glass
1061
Flashlamp
Semiconductor (p-n junction)
GaAs
820
Injection current
Semiconductor (electron-hole plasma)
GaAs
890
E-beam, laser
  pumping


--- PAGE 2079 ---
TeamLRN
Section 12: Properties of Solids
        Techniques for Materials Characterization
        Symmetry of Crystals
        Ionic Radii in Crystals
        Polarizability of Atoms and Ions in Solids
        Crystal Structures and Lattice Parameters of Allotropes of the Elements
        Lattice Energies
        The Madelung Constant and Crystal Lattice Energy
        Elastic Constants of Single Crystals
        Electrical Resistivity of Pure Metals
        Electrical Resistivity of Selected Alloys
        Permittivity (Dielectric Constant) of Inorganic Solids
        Curie Temperature of Selected Ferroelectric Crystals
        Properties of Antiferroelectric Crystals
        Dielectric Constants of Glasses
        Properties of Superconductors
        High Temperature Superconductors
        Organic Superconductors
        Properties of Semiconductors
        Diffusion Data for Semiconductors
        Properties of Magnetic Materials
        Organic Magnets
        Electron Work Function of the Elements
        Secondary Electron Emission
        Optical Properties of Selected Elements
        Optical Properties of Selected Inorganic and Organic Solids
        Elasto-optic, Electro-optic, and Magneto-optic Constants
        Nonlinear Optical Constants
        Phase Diagrams
        Heat Capacity of Selected Solids
        Thermal and Physical Properties of Pure Metals
        Thermal Conductivity of Metals and Semiconductors as a Function of Temperature
        Thermal Conductivity of Alloys as a Function of Temperature
        Thermal Conductivity of Crystalline Dielectrics
        Thermal Conductivity of Ceramics and Other Insulating Materials
        Thermal Conductivity of Glasses
        Fermi Energy and Related Properties of Metals
        Commercial Metals and Alloys
        Hardness of Minerals and Ceramics


--- PAGE 2096 ---
12-17
POLARIZABILITIES OF ATOMS AND IONS IN SOLIDS
H. P. R. Frederikse
The polarization of a solid dielectric medium, P, is defined as the dipole moment per unit volume averaged over the volume of a crystal cell. A
component of P can be expanded as a function of the electric field E:
For relatively small electric fields in isotropic substances P = χeE, where χe is the electric susceptibility. If the medium is made up of N atoms (or ions)
per unit volume, the polarization is P = N pm where pm is the average dipole moment per atom. The polarizability α can be defined as pm = αE0 , where
E0 is the local field at the position of the atom. Using the Lorentz method to calculate the local field one finds:
Together with the definition of the dielectric constant (relative permittivity) , ε = 1+ 4πχe, this leads to:
This expression is known as the Clausius-Mossotti equation.
The total polarization associated with atoms, ions, or molecules is due to three different sources:
1. Electronic polarization arises because the center of the local electronic charge cloud around the nucleus is displaced under the action of the field:
Pe = NαeE0 where αe is the electronic polarizability.
2. Ionic polarization occurs in ionic materials because the electric field displaces cations and anions in opposite directions: Pi = NαiE0, where αi is
the ionic polarizability.
3. Orientational polarization can occur in substances composed of molecules that have permanent electric dipoles. The alignment of these dipoles
depends on temperature and leads to an orientational polarizability per molecule: αor = p2/3kT, where p is the permanent dipole moment per
molecule, k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature.
Because of the different nature of these three polarization processes the response of a dielectric solid to an applied electric field will strongly depend
on the frequency of the field. The resonance of the electronic excitation in insulators (dielectrics) takes place in the ultraviolet part of the spectrum;
the characteristic frequency of the lattice vibrations is located in the infrared, while the orientation of dipoles requires fields of much lower frequencies
(below 1010 Hz). This response to electric fields of different frequencies is shown in Figure 1. Values of the electronic polarizabilities for selected atoms
and ions are given in Table 1.
REFERENCES
1. Kittel, C., Introduction to Solid State Physics, Fourth Edition, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1971.
2. Lerner, R.G., and Trigg, G.L., Editors, Encyclopedia of Physics, Second Edition, VCH Publishers, New York, 1990.
3. Ralls, K.M., Courtney, T.H., and Wulff, J., An Introduction to Materials Science and Engineering, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1976.
α
π
ε
ε
=
+




3
4
1
2
N
–
P
E
P
E
=
e
Nα
π
χ
+
(
) =
4
P
a E
b E E
i
j
j
j
jk
jk
j
k
=
+
Σ
Σ


--- PAGE 2140 ---
© 2000 CRC Press LLC
PROPERTIES OF ANTIFERROELECTRIC CRYSTALS
H. P. R. Frederikse
Some important antiferroelectric crystals are listed here with their Curie Temperatures TC. The last column gives the constant T0 which
appears in the Curie-Weiss law describing the dielectric constant of these materials above the Curie Temperature:
ε = const./(T - T0)
Name or acronym 
Formula 
TC/K 
T0/K
ADP 
NH4H2PO4
148
ADA 
NH4H2AsO4
216
ADDP 
NH4D2PO4
242, 245
ADDA 
NH4D2AsO4
299
AdDDP 
ND4D2PO4
243
AdDDA 
ND4D2AsO4
304
Sodium niobate 
NaNbO3
911, 793
Lead hafnate 
PbHfO3
476 
378
Lead zirconate 
PbZrO3
503 
475
Lead metaniobate 
PbNb2O6
843 
530
Lead metatantalate 
PbTa2O6
543 
533
Tungsten trioxide 
WO3
1010
Potassium strontium niobate 
KSr2Nb5O15
427 
413
Sodium nitrite 
NaNO2
437 
437
Sodium trihydrogen selenite 
NaH3(SeO3)2
193 
192
Sodium trideuterium selenite 
NaD3(SeO3)2
271 
245
Ammonium trihydrogen periodate 
(NH4)2H3IO6
245


--- PAGE 2141 ---
TeamLRN
12-59
DIELECTRIC CONSTANTS OF GLASSES
Dielectric constant
at 100 MHz
Volume resistivity
Type
(20°C)
(350°C megohm-cm)
Loss factora
Corning 0010
6.32
10
0.015
Corning 0080
6.75
0.13
0.058
Corning 0120
6.65
100
0.012
Pyrex 1710
6.00
2,500
0.025
Pyrex 3320
4.71
—
0.019
Pyrex 7040
4.65
80
0.013
Pyrex 7050
4.77
16
0.017
Pyrex 7052
5.07
25
0.019
Pyrex 7060
4.70
13
0.018
Pyrex 7070
4.00
1,300
0.0048
Vycor 7230
3.83
—
0.0061
Pyrex 7720
4.50
16
0.014
Pyrex 7740
5.00
4
0.040
Pyrex 7750
4.28
50
0.011
Pyrex 7760
4.50
50
0.0081
Vycor 7900
3.9
130
0.0023
Vycor 7910
3.8
1,600
0.00091
Vycor 7911
3.8
4,000
0.00072
Corning 8870
9.5
5,000
0.0085
G. E. Clear (silica glass)
3.81
4,000—30,000
0.00038
Quartz (fused)
3.75 4.1 (1 MHz)
—
0.0002 (1 MHz)
a
Power factor × dielectric constant equals loss factor.


--- PAGE 2257 ---
TeamLRN
© 2000 CRC Press LLC
ELASTO-OPTIC, ELECTRO-OPTIC, AND MAGNETO-OPTIC CONSTANTS
When a crystal is subjected to a stress field, an electric field, or a magnetic field, the resulting optical effects are in general dependent on the
orientation of these fields with respect to the crystal axes. It is useful, therefore, to express the optical properties in terms of the refractive index ellipsoid
(or indicatrix):
or
where
ε is the dielectric constant or permeability; the quantity Bij has the name impermeability.
A crystal exposed to a stress S will show a change of its impermeability. The photo-elastic (or elasto-optic) constants, Pijkl, are defined by
where n is the refractive index and Skl are the strain tensor elements; the Pijkl are the elements of a 4th rank tensor.
When a crystal is subjected to an electric field E two possible changes of the refractive index may occur depending on the symmetry of the crystal.
1. All materials, including isotropic solids and polar liquids, show an electro-optic birefringence (Kerr effect) which is proportional to the square
of the electric field, E:
where Ek and El are the components of the electric field and Pk and Pl the electric polarizations. The coefficients, Kijkl, are the quadratic electro-
optic coefficients, while the constants gijkl are known as the Kerr constants.
2. The other electro-optic effect only occurs in the 20 piezo-electric crystal classes (no center of symmetry). This effect is known as the Pockels
effect. The optical impermeability changes linearly with the static field
The coefficients rij,k have the name (linear) electro-optic coefficients.
The values of the electro-optic coefficients depend on the boundary conditions. If the superscripts T and S denote respectively the conditions of
zero stress (free) and zero strain (clamped) one finds:
where ejk = (∂Tk/∂Ej)S and djk = (∂Sk/∂Ej)T are the appropriate piezo-electric coefficients.
The interaction between a magnetic field and a light wave propagating in a solid or in a liquid gives rise to a rotation of the plane of polarization.
This effect is known as Faraday rotation. It results from a difference in propagation velocity for left and right circular polarized light.
The Faraday rotation, θF, is linearly proportional to the magnetic field H:
where l is the light path length and V is the Verdet constant (minutes/oersted⋅cm).
For ferromagnetic, ferrimagnetic, and antiferromagnetic materials the magnetic field in the above expression is replaced by the magnetization M
and the magneto-optic coefficient in this case is known as the Kund constant K:
Specific Faraday rotation F = KM
In the tables below the Faraday rotation is listed at the saturation magnetization per unit length, together with the absorption coefficient α, the
temperature T, the critical temperature TC (or TN), and the wavelength of the measurement.
B
n
ij
ij
ij
= 



= 



1
1
2
ε
∆
∆
1
1
2
ε




=




= ∑
ij
ij
ijkl
kl
kl
n
P
S
1
2
1 2 3
1 2 3
n
K
E E
g
P P
ij
k,l
, ,
ijkl
k
l
k,l
, ,
ijkl
k
l




=
=
=
=
∑
∑
∆
1
2
n
r
E
ij
ij,k
k
k




= ∑
r
r
q e
r
P d
ij
ij
ik
jk
ij
ik
jk
T
S
E
S
E
=
+
=
+
θF = VlH
x
n
y
n
z
n
x
y
z
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
+
+
=
B x y
i, j
, ,
ij
i
j
ij
=
=
∑
1
1 2 3
(
)


--- PAGE 2264 ---
© 2000 CRC Press LLC
ELASTO-OPTIC, ELECTRO-OPTIC, AND MAGNETO-OPTIC CONSTANTS (continued)
LINEAR ELECTRO-OPTIC COEFFICIENTS (continued)
Name
Ttran
r11
r41
Trigonal (32)
Formula
K
pm/V
pm/V
Potassium dithionate
K2S2O6
—
0.26
—
Strontium dithionate
SrS2O6⋅4H2O
—
0.1
—
Quartz
SiO2
1140
-0.47
0.2
Selenium
Se
398
2.5
Ttran
r41
r52
r63
Orthorhombic (222)
Formula
K
pm/V
pm/V
pm/V
Ammonium oxalate
(NH4)2C2O4⋅4H2O
—
230
330
250
Rochelle salt
KNaC4H4O6⋅4H2O
Tu = 297
-2.0
-1.7
+0.32
Tl = 255
Ttrans
r13
r23
r33
r42
r51
Orthorhombic (mm2)
Formula
K
pm/V
pm/V
pm/V
pm/V
pm/V
Barium sodium niobate (BSN)
Ba2NaNbO15
833
15
13
48
92
90
Potassium niobate
KNbO3
476
28
1.3
64
380
105
Ttrans
r22
r32
Monoclinic (2)
Formula
K
pm/V
pm/V
Calcium pyroniobate
Ca2Nb2O7
—
0.33
13.7
Triglycine sulfate (TGS)
(NH2CH2COOH)3⋅H2SO4
322
7.2
13.6
REFERENCES
1. Narasimhamurty, T. S., Photoelastic and Electro-Optic Properties of Crystals, Plenum Press, New York, 1981, pp. 405-407.
2. Weber, M. J., Ed., CRC Handbook of Laser Science and Technology, Vol. IV, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1986, pp. 258-278.
QUADRATIC ELECTRO-OPTIC COEFFICIENTS
Kerr Constants of Ferroelectric Crystals1,2
Ttran
λ
g11
g12
g11-g12
g44
Name
Formula
K
µm
1010 esu
1010 esu
1010 esu
1010 esu
Barium titanate
BaTiO3
406
0.633
1.33
-0.11
1.44
Strontium titanate
SrTiO3
—
0.633
—
—
1.56
—
Potassium tantalate
  niobate
KTa0.65Nb0.35O3
330
0.633
1.50
-0.42
1.92
1.63
Potassium tantalate
KTaO3
13
0.633
—
—
1.77
1.33
Lithium niobate
LiNbO3
1483
—
0.94
0.25
0.7
0.6
Lithium tantalate
LiTaO3
938
—
1.0
0.17
0.8
0.7
Barium sodium
  niobate (BSN)
Ba0.8Na0.4Nb2O6
833
—
1.55
0.44
1.11
Kerr Constants of Selected Liquids2
K is the Kerr constant at a wavelength of 589 nm and at room temperature; ε is the static dielectric constant;
Tm is the melting point; and Tb is the normal boiling point
Molecular
K
ε
Tm
Tb
Name
formula
10–7 esu
°C
°C
Carbon disulfide
CS2
+3.23
2.63
-111.5
+46.3
Acetone
C3H6O
+16.3
21.0
-94.8
+56.1
Methyl ethyl ketone
C4H8O
+13.6
18.56
-86.67
+79.6


--- PAGE 2265 ---
TeamLRN
© 2000 CRC Press LLC
ELASTO-OPTIC, ELECTRO-OPTIC, AND MAGNETO-OPTIC CONSTANTS (continued)
QUADRATIC ELECTRO-OPTIC COEFFICIENTS (continued)
MAGNETO-OPTIC CONSTANTS
Verdet Constants of Non-Magnetic Crystals1
V is the Verdet constant; n is the refractive index; and λ is the wavelength
T
λ
n
V
Material
K
nm
min/Oe cm
Al2O3
300
546.1
1.771
0.0240
300
589.3
1.768
0.0210
BaTaO3
403
427
0.95
403
496
0.38
403
620
0.18
403
826
0.072
Bi4Ge3O12
300
442
2.077
0.289
300
632.8
2.048
0.099
300
1064
2.031
0.026
C (diamond)
300
589.3
2.417
0.0233
CaCO3
300
589.3
1.658
0.019
CaF2
300
589.3
1.434
0.0088
Cd0.55Mn0.45Te
300
632.8
6.87
Kerr Constants of Selected Liquids (continued)2
Molecular
K
ε
Tm
Tb
Name
formula
10–7 esu
°C
°C
Pyridine
C5H5N
+20.4
13.26
-42
+115.23
Ethyl cyanoacetate
C5H7NO2
+38.8
31.6
-22.5
205
o-Dichlorobenzene
C6H4Cl2
+42.6
10.12
-16.7
180
Benzenesulfonyl chloride
C6H5ClO2S
+89.9
28.90
+14.5
247
Nitrobenzene
C6H5NO2
+326
35.6
+5.7
210.8
Ethyl 3-aminocrotonate
C6H11NO2
+31.0
—
+33.9
210
Paraldehyde
C6H12O3
-23.0
14.7
+12.6
124
12.0a
Benzaldehyde
C7H6O
+80.8
17.85
-26
179.05
14.1a
p-Chlorotoluene
C7H7Cl
+23.0
6.25
+7.5
162.4
o-Nitrotoluene
C7H7NO2
+174
26.26
-10
222.3
m-Nitrotoluene
C7H7NO2
+177
24.95
+15.5
232
p-Nitrotoluene
C7H7NO2
+222
22.2
+51.6
238.3
Benzyl alcohol
C7H8O
-15.4
11.92
-15.3
205.8
10.8a
m-Cresol
C7H8O
+21.2
12.44
+11.8
202.27
5.0a
m-Chloroacetophenone
C8H7ClO
+69.1
Acetophenone
C8H8O
+66.6
17.44
+19.7
202.3
15.8a
Quinoline
C9H7N
+15.0
9.16
-14.78
237.16
Ethyl salicylate
C9H10O3
+19.6
8.48
+1.3
231.5
Carvone
C10H14O
+23.6
11.2
<0
230
Ethyl benzoylacetate
C11H12O3
+16.0
13.50
<0
270
Water
H2O
+4.0
80.10
0.00
100.0
a  Dielectric constant at radiofrequencies (108-109 Hz).
REFERENCES
1. Narasimhamurty, T. S., Photoelastic and Electro-Optic Properties of Crystals, Plenum Press, New York, 1981, p. 408.
2. Gray, D. E., Ed., AIP Handbook of Physics, McGraw Hill, New York, 1972, p. 6-241.


--- PAGE 2278 ---
PHASE DIAGRAMS
H. P. R. Frederikse
A phase is a structurally homogeneous portion of matter. Regardless of the number of chemical constituents of a gas, there is only one vapor phase.
This is true also for the liquid form of a pure substance, although a mixture of several liquid substances may exist as one or several phases, depending
on the interactions among the substances. On the other hand a pure solid may exist in several phases at different temperatures and pressures because
of differences in crystal structure (Reference 1). At the phase transition temperature, Ttr, the chemical composition of the solid remains the same, but
often a change in the physical properties will take place. Such changes are found in ferroelectric crystals (example BaTiO3) which develop a
spontaneous polarization below Ttr, in superconductors (example Pb) which loose all electrical resistance below the transition point, and in many other
classes of solids.
In quite a few cases it is difficult to bring about the phase transition, and the high- (or low-) temperature phase persists in its metastable form. Many
liquids remain in the liquid state for shorter or longer periods of time when cooled below the melting point (supercooling). However, often the slightest
disturbance will cause solidification. Persistence of the high temperature phase in solid-solid transitions is usually of much longer duration. An example
of this behavior is found in white tin; although gray tin is the thermodynamically stable form below Ttr (286.4 K), the metal remains in its undercooled,
white tin state all the way to T = 0 K, and crystals of gray tin are very difficult to produce.
A phase diagram is a map which indicates the areas of stability of the various phases as a function of external conditions (temperature and pressure).
Pure materials, such as mercury, helium, water, and methyl alcohol are considered one-component systems and they have unary phase diagrams. The
equilibrium phases in two-component systems are presented in binary phase diagrams. Because many important materials consist of three, four, and
more components, many attempts have been made to deduce their multicomponent phase diagrams. However, the vast majority of systems with three
or more components are very complex, and no overall maps of the phase relationships have been worked out.
It has been shown during the last 20 to 25 years that very useful partial phase diagrams of complex systems can be obtained by means of
thermodynamic modeling (References 2, 3). Especially for complicated, multicomponent alloy systems the CALPHAD method has proved to be a
successful approach for producing valuable portions of very intricate phase diagrams (Reference 4). With this method thermodynamic descriptions
of the free energy functions of various phases are obtained which are consistent with existing (binary) phase diagram information and other
thermodynamic data. Extrapolation methods are then used to extend the thermodynamic functions into a ternary system. Comparison of the results
of this procedure with available experimental data is then used to fine-tune the phase diagram and add ternary interaction functions if necessary. In
principle this approximation strategy can be extended to four, five, and more component systems.
The nearly two dozen phase diagrams shown below present the reader with examples of some important types of single and multicomponent
systems, especially for ceramics and metal alloys. This makes it possible to draw attention to certain features like the kinetic aspects of phase transitions
(see Figure 22, which presents a time-temperature-transformation, or TTT, diagram for the precipitation of α-phase particles from the β-phase in a
Ti-Mo alloy; Reference 1, pp.358-360). The general references listed below and the references to individual figures contain phase diagrams for many
additional systems.
GENERAL REFERENCES
1. Ralls, K.M., Courtney, T.H., and Wulff, J., Introduction to Materials Science and Engineering, Chapters 16 and 17, John Wiley & Sons, New
York, 1976.
2. Kaufman, L., and Bernstein, H., Computer Calculation of Phase Diagrams, Academic Press, New York, 1970.
3. Kattner, U.R., Boettinger, W.J.B., and Coriell, S.R., Z. Metallkd., 87, 9, 1996.
4. Dinsdale, A.T., Editor, CALPHAD, Vol. 1–20, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1977–1996 and continuing.
5. Baker, H., Editor, ASM Handbook, Volume 3: Alloy Phase Diagrams, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1992.
6. Massalski, T.B., Editor, Binary Alloy Phase Diagrams, Second Edition, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1990.
7. Roth. R.S., Editor, Phase Diagrams for Ceramists, Vol. I (1964) to Volume XI (1995), American Ceramic Society, Waterville, OH.
REFERENCES TO INDIVIDUAL PHASE DIAGRAMS
Figure 1. Carbon: Reference 7, Vol. X (1994), Figure 8930. Reprinted with permission.
Figure 2. Si-Ge : Ref.5, p. 2.231. Reprinted with permission.
Figure 3. H2O (ice): See figure.
Figure 4. SiO2: Reference 7, Vol. XI (1995), Figure 9174. Reprinted with permission.
Figure 5. Fe-O: Darken, L.S., and Gurry, R.W., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 68, 798, 1946. Reprinted with permission.
Figure 6. Ti-O: Reference 5, p. 2.324. Reprinted with permission.
Figure 7. BaO-TiO2: Reference 7, Vol. III (1975), Figure 4302. Reprinted with permission.
Figure 8. MgO-Al2O3: Reference 7, Vol. XI (1995), Figure 9239. Reprinted with permission.
Figure 9. Y2O3-ZrO2: Reference 7, Vol. XI (1995), Figure 9348. Reprinted with permission.
Figure 10. Si-N-Al-O (Sialon): Reference 7, Vol. X (1994), Figure 8759. Reprinted with permission.
Figure 11. PbO-ZrO2-TiO2 (PZT): Reference 7, Vol. III (1975), Figure 4587. Reprinted with permission.
Figure 12. Al-Si-Ca-O: Reference 7 (1964), Vol. I, Figure 630. Reprinted with permission.
Figure 13. Y-Ba-Cu-O: Whitler, J.D., and Roth, R.S., Phase Diagrams for High Tc Superconductors, Figure S-082, American Ceramic Society,
Waterville, OH, 1990. Reprinted with permission.
Figure 14. Al-Cu: Reference 5, p. 2.44. Reprinted with permission.
Figure 15. Fe-C: Ralls, K.M., Courtney, T.H., and Wulff, J., Introduction to Materials Science and Engineering, Figure 16.13 , John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 1976. Reprinted with permission.
Figure 16. Fe-Cr: Reference 5, p. 2.152. Reprinted with permission.
12-200


--- PAGE 2297 ---
TeamLRN
12-219
THERMAL AND PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF PURE METALS
This table gives the following properties for the metallic elements:
tm:
Melting point in ° C
tb:
Normal boiling point in ° C, at a pressure of 101.325 kPa (760 Torr)
∆
fus H:
Enthalpy of fusion at the melting point in J/g
ρ 25:
Density at 25° C in g/cm3
α :
Coefficient of linear expansion at 25° C in K-1 (the quantity listed is 106 × α )
cp:
Specific heat capacity at constant pressure at 25° C in J/g K
λ:
Thermal conductivity at 27° C in W/cm K
REFERENCES
1. Dinsdale, A. T., CALPHAD, 15, 317, 1991 (melting points, enthalpy of fusion).
2. Touloukian, Y. S., Thermophysical Properties of Matter, Vol. 12, Thermal Expansion, IFI/Plenum, New York, 1975 (coefficient of
expansion, density).
3. Ho, C. Y., Powell, R. W., and Liley, P. E., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 3, Suppl. 1, 1974 (thermal conductivity).
4. Cox, J. D., Wagman, D. D., and Medvedev, V. A., CODATA Key Values for Thermodynamics, Hemisphere Publishing Corp., New York,
1989 (heat capacity).
5. Glushko, V. P., Ed., Thermal Constants of Substances, VINITI, Moscow, (enthalpy of fusion, heat capacity).
6. Wagman, D. D., et. al., The NBS Tables of Chemical Thermodynamic Properties, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 11, Suppl. 2, 1982 (heat
capacity).
7. Chase, M. W., et. al., JANAF Thermochemical Tables, 3rd ed., J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 14, Suppl. 1, 1985 (heat capacity, enthalpy of
fusion).
8. Gschneidner, K. A., Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams, 11, 216—224, 1990 (various properties of the rare earth metals).
9. Hellwege, K. H., Ed., Landolt Börnstein, Numerical Values and Functions in Physics, Chemistry, Astronomy, Geophysics, and Technol-
ogy, Vol. 2, Part 1, Mechanical-Thermal Properties of State, 1971 (density).
10. Physical Encyclopedic Dictionary, Vol. 1–5, Encyclopedy Publishing House, Moscow, 1960–66.
Metal
Atomic
tm
tb
∆
fus H
ρ 25
α  × 106
cp
λ
(symbol)
weight
° C
° C
J/g
g/cm3
K-1
J/g K
W/cm K
Actinium (Ac)
1051
3198
10
0.12
Aluminum (Al)
26.98
660.32
2519
399.9
2.70
23.1
0.904
2.37
Antimony (Sb)
121.76
630.63
1587
162.5
6.68
11.0
0.207
0.243
Barium (Ba)
137.33
727
1897
51.8
3.62
20.6
0.205
0.184
Beryllium (Be)
9.01
1287
2471
876.0
1.85
11.3
1.82
2.00
Bismuth (Bi)
208.98
271.40
1564
53.3
9.79
13.4
0.122
0.0787
Cadmium (Cd)
112.41
321.07
767
55.2
8.69
30.8
0.231
0.968
Calcium (Ca)
40.08
842
1484
213.1
1.54
22.3
0.646
2.00
Cerium (Ce)
140.11
798
3443
39.0
6.77
6.3
0.192
0.113
Cesium (Cs)
132.91
28.44
671
15.7
1.93
97
0.242
0.359
Chromium (Cr)
52.00
1907
2671
404
7.15
4.9
0.450
0.937
Cobalt (Co)
58.93
1495
2927
272.5
8.86
13.0
0.421
1.00
Copper (Cu)
63.55
1084.62
2562
203.5
8.96
16.5
0.384
4.01
Dysprosium (Dy)
162.50
1412
2567
68.1
8.55
9.9
0.170
0.107
Erbium (Er)
167.26
1529
2868
119
9.07
12.2
0.168
0.145
Europium (Eu)
151.96
822
1529
60.6
5.24
35.0
0.182
0.139a
Gadolinium (Gd)
157.25
1313
3273
63.6
7.90
9.4b
0.235
0.105
Gallium (Ga)
69.72
29.767
2204
80.0
5.91
18
0.374
0.406
Gold (Au)
196.97
1064.18
2856
64.6
19.3
14.2
0.129
3.17
Hafnium (Hf)
178.49
2233
4603
152.4
13.3
5.9
0.144
0.230
Holmium (Ho)
164.93
1474
2700
103a
8.80
11.2
0.165
0.162
Indium (In)
114.82
156.60
2072
28.6
7.31
32.1
0.233
0.816
Iridium (Ir)
192.22
2446
4428
213.9
22.5
6.4
0.131
1.47
Iron (Fe)
55.85
1538
2861
247.3
7.87
11.8
0.449
0.802
Lanthanum (La)
138.91
918
3464
44.6
6.15
12.1
0.195
0.134
Lead (Pb)
207.20
327.46
1749
23.1
11.3
28.9
0.127
0.353
Lithium (Li)
6.94
180.5
1342
432
0.534
46
3.57
0.847
Lutetium (Lu)
174.97
1663
3402
126a
9.84
9.9
0.154
0.164
Magnesium (Mg)
24.30
650
1090
348.9
1.74
24.8
1.024
1.56


--- PAGE 2315 ---
TeamLRN
Section 13: Polymer Properties
        Nomenclature for Organic Polymers
        Solvents for Common Polymers
        Glass Transition Temperature for Selected Polymers
        Dielectric Constant of Selected Polymers
        Pressure-Volume-Temperature Relationship for Polymer Melts
        Upper Critical (UCST) and Lower Critical (LCST) Solution Temperatures of Binary Polymer Solutions


--- PAGE 2322 ---
13-3
SOLVENTS FOR COMMON POLYMERS
Abbreviations: HC: hydrocarbons; MEK: methyl ethyl ketone; THF: tetrahydrofuran; DMF: dimethylformamide; DMSO: dimethylsulfoxide
Polyethylene (HDPE)
HC and halogenated HC
Polypropylene (atactic)
HC and halogenated HC
Polybutadiene
HC, THF, ketones
Polystyrene
ethylbenzene, CHCl3, CCl4, THF, MEK
Polyacrylates
aromatic HC, chlorinated HC, THF, esters, ketones
Polymethacrylates
aromatic HC, chlorinated HC, THF, esters, MEK
Polyacrylamide
water
Poly(vinyl ethers)
halogenated HC, MEK, butanol
Poly(vinyl alcohol)
glycols (hot), DMF
Poly(vinyl acetate)
aromatic HC, chlorinated HC, THF, esters, DMF
Poly(vinyl chloride)
THF, DMF, DMSO
Poly(vinylidene chloride)
THF (hot), dioxane, DMF
Poly(vinyl fluoride)
DMF, DMSO (hot)
Polyacrylonitrile
DMF, DMSO
Poly(oxyethylene)
aromatic HC, CHCl3, alcohols, esters, DMF
Poly(2,6-dimethylphenylene oxide)
aromatic HC, halogenated HC
Poly(ethylene terephthalate)
phenol, DMSO (hot)
Polyurethanes (linear)
aromatic HC, THF, DMF
Polyureas
phenol, formic acid
Polysiloxanes
HC, THF, DMF
Poly[bis(2,2,2-trifluoroethoxy)-phosphazene]
THF, ketones, ethyl acetate


--- PAGE 2331 ---
TeamLRN
13-15
DIELECTRIC CONSTANT OF SELECTED POLYMERS
This table lists typical values of the dielectric constant (more properly called relative permittivity) of some important polymers. Values are given
for frequencies of 1 kHz, 1 MHz, and 1 GHz; in most cases the dielectric constant at frequencies below 1 kHz does not differ significantly from the
value at 1 kHz. Since the dielectric constant of a polymeric material can vary with density, degree of crystallinity, and other details of a particular sample,
the values given here should be regarded only as typical or average values.
REFERENCES
1. Gray, D.E., Ed., American Institute of Physics Handbook, Third Edition, p. 5-132, McGraw Hill, New York, 1972.
2. Anderson, H.L., Editor, A Physicist’s Desk Reference, American Institute of Physics, New York, 1989.
3. Brandrup, J., and Immergut, E.H., Polymer Handbook, Third Edition, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1989.
Name
t/°C
1 kHz
1 MHz
1 GHz
Polyacrylonitrile
25
5.5
4.2
Polyamides (nylons)
25
3.50
3.14
2.8
84
11
4.4
2.8
Polybutadiene
25
2.5
Polycarbonate
23
2.92
2.8
Polychloroprene (neoprene)
25
6.6
6.3
4.2
Polychlorotrifluoroethylene
23
2.65
2.46
2.39
Polyethylene
23
2.3
Poly(ethylene terephthalate) (Mylar)
23
3.25
3.0
2.8
Polyisoprene (natural rubber)
27
2.6
2.5
2.4
Poly(methyl methacrylate)
27
3.12
2.76
2.6
80
3.80
2.7
2.6
Polyoxymethylene (polyformaldehyde)
25
3.8
Poly(phenylene oxide)
23
2.59
2.59
Polypropylene
25
2.3
2.3
2.3
Polystyrene
25
2.6
2.6
2.6
Polysulfones
25
3.13
2.10
Polytetrafluoroethylene (teflon)
25
2.1
2.1
2.1
Poly(vinyl acetate)
50
3.5
150
8.3
Poly(vinyl chloride)
25
3.39
2.9
2.8
100
5.3
3.3
2.7
Poly(vinylidene chloride)
23
4.6
3.2
2.7
Poly(vinylidene fluoride)
23
12.2
8.9
4.7


--- PAGE 2337 ---
TeamLRN
13-21
UPPER CRITICAL (UCST) AND LOWER CRITICAL (LCST) SOLUTION TEMPERATURES OF BINARY 
POLYMER SOLUTIONS
Christian Wohlfarth
Liquid-liquid demixing in solutions of polymers in low molar mass solvents is not a rare phenomenon. Demixing depends on concentration, tem-
perature, pressure, molar mass and molar mass distribution function of the polymer, chain branching and end groups of the polymer, the chemical
nature of the solvent, isotope substitution in solvents or polymers, chemical composition of copolymers and its distributions, and other variables.
Phase diagrams of polymer solutions can therefore show a quite complicated behavior when they have to be considered in detail (see Ref. 1a). 
Polymer solutions can undergo demixing when cooling a homogeneous solution as well as when heating such a solution. The corresponding cloud-
point curves show a maximum (UCST behavior) or a minimum (LCST behavior). For common polymer solutions, the LCST region is at higher tem-
peratures (in many cases near the critical temperature of the solvent) than the UCST region. The temperature range between both extrema provides
the essential information where the one-phase region of a polymer solution can be found. In the case of monodisperse polymers the extrema are
equal to the critical points. However, in the case of polydisperse polymers with distribution functions, these extrema are threshold temperatures
whereas the critical point shifts to higher concentrations on the shoulder of the cloud-point curve. Usually, the critical concentration is much more
strongly inﬂuenced than the critical temperature. Thus, the table below does not distinguish between threshold and critical temperatures. 
UCST and LCST values depend somewhat on pressure. LCST values in the table are usually given at the vapor pressure of the solvent at this
temperature. UCST values are measured in most cases at normal pressure; data at higher pressures are neglected here. The interested reader can
ﬁnd such information, for example, in Refs. 76, 84, 104, 157, 165, 177, 185-187, or 192. 
However, UCST and LCST values of a given polymer/solvent pair depend strongly on the molar mass of the polymer. In the case of monodis-
perse polymers, this dependency can be described in good approximation by the so-called Shultz-Flory plot (see Refs. 6 and 8):
(1)
where r  denotes the number of segments of a polymer (being proportional to the degree of polymerization or to the molar mass or molar volume of
the polymer). Extrapolation to r → ∞, i.e., to inﬁnite molar mass, leads to the value of the θ-temperature. This θ-temperature is the highest temper-
ature for UCST behavior or the lowest temperature for LCST behavior and a given polymer/solvent pair. In the case of polydisperse polymers, the
segment number in equation (1) is to be replaced by its weight average, rw (related to Mw). The constant in equation (1) reﬂects further thermody-
namic properties of the given polymer/solvent pair, but should not depend on molar mass. A detailed discussion can be found in Ref. 1b.
The printed table in the Handbook provides only one data line for a given polymer/solvent pair and does not show the molar mass dependence of
UCST or LCST data. The entire table with all data at different molar masses for many of the systems is given in the electronic version, however.
Nevertheless, the necessary molar mass information for a system is always provided in the table by the corresponding number average, Mn, mass
average, Mw, or viscosity average, Mη, values of the polymer as given in the original sources.
Polymer
Mn/g/mol
Mw/g/mol Mη/g/mol
Solvent
UCST/K LCST/K
Ref
Acrylonitrile/butadiene copolymer
(18% Acrylonitrile)
840000
Ethyl acetate
427
220
(26% Acrylonitrile)
1000000
Ethyl acetate
412
220
Butadiene/α-methylstyrene copolymer  
(10% α-Methylstyrene)
100000
Ethyl acetate
387
393
220
Carbon monoxide/ethylene copolymer 
(1:1, alternating)
1000000
1,1,1,3,3,3-Hexaﬂuoro-2-
propanol
453
159
Cellulose diacetate
120000
Benzyl alcohol
372
86
59900
75500
2-Butanone
279.7
471.5
111
59300
2-Propanone
216.2
438.2
42
Cellulose diacetate/styrene graft copolymer 
(77.4 wt% grafted polystyrene)
750000
N,N-Dimethylformamide
262
399
106
750000
Tetrahydrofuran
363
106
Cellulose nitrate (13.3 wt% N)
unknown
2-Propanone
328
182
148
Cellulose triacetate
20000
Benzyl alcohol
322
86
100500
2-Propanone
290.0
472.0
42
Cellulose tricaprylate
inﬁnite
N,N-Dimethylformamide
413
5
inﬁnite
3-Phenyl-1-propanol
321
5
1
1 1
1
1
2
T
const
r
r
crit
=
+
−












θ
.


--- PAGE 2338 ---
13-22
UPPER CRITICAL (UCST) AND LOWER CRITICAL (LCST) SOLUTION TEMPERATURES OF BINARY 
POLYMER SOLUTIONS (continued)
Decamethyltetrasiloxane
310.69
Tetradecaﬂuorohexane
332.59
195
N,N-Dimethylacrylamide/2-butoxyethyl 
acrylate copolymer (50 wt% 2-butoxyethyl 
acrylate)
Water
<273.2
164
N,N-Dimethylacrylamide/butyl acrylate 
copolymer  
(15 wt% Butyl acrylate)
Water
346.2
164
(20 wt% Butyl acrylate)
Water
323.2
164
(30 wt% Butyl acrylate)
Water
294.2
164
(35 wt% Butyl acrylate)
Water
281.2
164
N,N-Dimethylacrylamide/2-ethoxyethyl 
acrylate copolymer  
(50 wt% 2-Ethoxyethyl acrylate)
Water
319.2
164
(75 wt% 2-Ethoxyethyl acrylate)
Water
285.2
164
N,N-Dimethylacrylamide/ethyl acrylate 
copolymer  
(25 wt% Ethyl acrylate)
Water
347.2
164
(30 wt% Ethyl acrylate)
Water
334.2
164
(50 wt% Ethyl acrylate)
Water
287.2
164
(55 wt% Ethyl acrylate)
Water
<273.2
164
N,N-Dimethylacrylamide/2-methoxyethyl 
acrylate copolymer  
(38 mol% 2-Methoxyethyl acrylate)
Water
353
184
(45 mol% 2-Methoxyethyl acrylate)
Water
333
184
(55 mol% 2-Methoxyethyl acrylate)
Water
315
184
(68 mol% 2-Methoxyethyl acrylate)
Water
305
184
(82 mol% 2-Methoxyethyl acrylate)
Water
288
184
(92 mol% 2-Methoxyethyl acrylate)
Water
283
184
N,N-Dimethylacrylamide/methyl acrylate 
copolymer  
(30 wt% Methyl acrylate)
Water
371.2
164
(40 wt% Methyl acrylate)
Water
338.2
164
(50 wt% Methyl acrylate)
Water
314.2
164
(55 wt% Methyl acrylate)
Water
294.2
164
(60 wt% Methyl acrylate)
Water
279.2
164
(70 wt% Methyl acrylate)
Water
<273.2
164
N,N-Dimethylacrylamide/propyl acrylate 
copolymer
(20 wt% Propyl acrylate)
Water
353.2
164
(30 wt% Propyl acrylate)
Water
337.2
164
(40 wt% Propyl acrylate)
Water
294.2
164
(50 wt% Propyl acrylate)
Water
281.2
164
Dimethylsiloxane/methylphenylsiloxane 
copolymer (15 wt% methylphenylsiloxane)
9100
41200
Anisole
291.45
198
9100
41200
2-Propanone
282.45
198
Ethylene/propylene copolymer  
(33 mol% ethylene)
145000
Cyclohexane
534
101
145000
Cyclopentane
490
101
145000
2,2-Dimethylbutane
428
101
145000
2,3-Dimethylbutane
452
101
145000
3,4-Dimethylhexane
541
101
Polymer
Mn/g/mol
Mw/g/mol Mη/g/mol
Solvent
UCST/K LCST/K
Ref


--- PAGE 2339 ---
TeamLRN
13-23
UPPER CRITICAL (UCST) AND LOWER CRITICAL (LCST) SOLUTION TEMPERATURES OF BINARY 
POLYMER SOLUTIONS (continued)
145000
2,2-Dimethylpentane
472
101
145000
2,3-Dimethylpentane
500
101
145000
2,4-Dimethylpentane
464
101
145000
3-Ethylpentane
511
101
145000
Heptane
502
101
145000
Hexane
455
101
145000
2-Methylbutane
396
101
145000
Methylcyclohexane
558
101
145000
Methylcyclopentane
512
101
145000
2-Methylhexane
486
101
145000
Nonane
558
101
145000
Octane
528
101
145000
Pentane
409
101
145000
2,2,4,4-Tetramethylpentane
539
101
145000
2,2,3-Trimethylbutane
500
101
145000
2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
503
101
Ethylene/propylene copolymer  
(43 mol% ethylene)
70000
140000
Hexane
436
127
70000
140000
2-Methylpentane
474
127
70000
140000
Pentane
441
127
Ethylene/propylene copolymer  
(53 mol% ethylene)
154000
2,2-Dimethylbutane
407
101
154000
2,3-Dimethylbutane
437
101
154000
2,2-Dimethylpentane
453
101
154000
2,3-Dimethylpentane
488
101
154000
2,4-Dimethylpentane
445
101
154000
3-Ethylpentane
500
101
154000
Heptane
493
101
154000
Hexane
443
101
154000
Pentane
395
101
154000
2,2,3-Trimethylbutane
488
101
154000
2,3,4-Trimethylhexane
565
101
154000
2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
484
101
Ethylene/propylene copolymer  
(63 mol% ethylene)
236000
Cyclohexane
526
101
236000
Cyclopentane
481
101
236000
2,3-Dimethylbutane
429
101
236000
3,4-Dimethylhexane
530
101
236000
2,2-Dimethylpentane
444
101
236000
2,3-Dimethylpentane
482
101
236000
2,4-Dimethylpentane
434
101
236000
3-Ethylpentane
492
101
236000
Heptane
485
101
236000
Hexane
436
101
236000
2-Methylbutane
348
101
236000
Methylcyclopentane
498
101
236000
Nonane
547
101
236000
Octane
512
101
236000
Pentane
387
101
236000
2,2,4,4-Tetramethylpentane
528
101
236000
2,2,3-Trimethylbutane
479
101
236000
2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
479
101
Polymer
Mn/g/mol
Mw/g/mol Mη/g/mol
Solvent
UCST/K LCST/K
Ref


--- PAGE 2340 ---
13-24
UPPER CRITICAL (UCST) AND LOWER CRITICAL (LCST) SOLUTION TEMPERATURES OF BINARY 
POLYMER SOLUTIONS (continued)
Ethylene/propylene copolymer  
(75 mol% ethylene)
109000
2,2-Dimethylpentane
431
101
109000
2,4-Dimethylpentane
425
101
109000
Heptane
475
101
109000
Hexane
427
101
109000
Nonane
542
101
109000
Octane
509
101
109000
Pentane
378
101
109000
2,2,4,4-Tetramethylpentane
523
101
109000
2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
469
101
Ethylene/propylene copolymer  (81 mol% 
ethylene)
195000
Cyclohexane
522
101
195000
Cyclopentane
474
101
195000
2,2-Dimethylbutane
381
101
195000
2,3-Dimethylbutane
413
101
195000
2,4-Dimethylhexane
478
101
195000
2,5-Dimethylhexane
466
101
195000
3,4-Dimethylhexane
522
101
195000
2,2-Dimethylpentane
425
101
195000
2,3-Dimethylpentane
471
101
195000
2,4-Dimethylpentane
420
101
195000
3-Ethylpentane
478
101
195000
Heptane
468
101
195000
Hexane
425
101
195000
2-Methylbutane
327
101
195000
Methylcyclohexane
541
101
195000
Methylcyclopentane
493
101
195000
2-Methylhexane
453
101
195000
3-Methylhexane
459
101
195000
Nonane
540
101
195000
Octane
506
101
195000
Pentane
370
101
195000
2,2,4,4-Tetramethylpentane
519
101
195000
2,2,3-Trimethylbutane
461
101
195000
2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
460
101
Ethylene/vinyl acetate copolymer  
( 2.3 wt% Vinyl acetate)
52000
465000
Diphenyl ether
404.2
143
( 4.0 wt% Vinyl acetate)
47000
280000
Diphenyl ether
392.5
143
( 7.1 wt% Vinyl acetate)
34000
460000
Diphenyl ether
378.2
143
( 9.5 wt% Vinyl acetate)
53000
350000
Diphenyl ether
367.3
143
( 9.7 wt% Vinyl acetate)
55000
490000
Diphenyl ether
370.8
143
(12.1 wt% Vinyl acetate)
66000
300000
Diphenyl ether
360.4
143
(42.6 mol% Vinyl acetate)
14800
41500
Methyl acetate
307.0
130
Ethylene/vinyl alcohol copolymer 
(87.2 mol% Vinyl alcohol)
inﬁnite
Water
463.55
285.65
44
(88.9 mol% Vinyl alcohol)
inﬁnite
Water
449.15
290.75
44
(91.0 mol% Vinyl alcohol)
inﬁnite
Water
428.45
302.95
44
(94.1 mol% Vinyl alcohol)
inﬁnite
Water
389.25
324.45
44
Ethylene oxide/propylene oxide copolymer 
(20.0 mol% Ethylene oxide) 
3400
Water
303
211
(27.0 mol% Ethylene oxide) 
3000
Water
309
210
(30.0 mol% Ethylene oxide) 
5400
Water
313
211
Polymer
Mn/g/mol
Mw/g/mol Mη/g/mol
Solvent
UCST/K LCST/K
Ref


--- PAGE 2341 ---
TeamLRN
13-25
UPPER CRITICAL (UCST) AND LOWER CRITICAL (LCST) SOLUTION TEMPERATURES OF BINARY 
POLYMER SOLUTIONS (continued)
(38.5 mol% Ethylene oxide) 
5000
Water
309
210
(50.0 mol% Ethylene oxide) 
3900
Water
323
211
(58.8 mol% Ethylene oxide) 
3000
Water
326.65
210
(72.4 mol% Ethylene oxide)
36000
Water
333
153
(79.5 mol% Ethylene oxide)
30800
Water
345
153
(86.6 mol% Ethylene oxide)
30100
Water
355.5
153
Gutta Percha
194000
Propyl acetate
318.95
7
Hydroxypropylcellulose
75000
Water
318.45
43
300000
Water
331.25
43
N-Isopropylacrylamide/acrylamide copolymer
(15 mol% Acrylamide)
3100000
Water
315.15
172
(30 mol% Acrylamide)
4500000
Water
326.15
172
(45 mol% Acrylamide)
3900000
Water
347.15
172
N-Isopropylacrylamide/1-deoxy-1-
methacrylamido-D-glucitol
(12.9 mol% Glucitol)
78000
170000
Water
311.3
218
(13.7 mol% Glucitol)
51600
110000
Water
314.9
218
(14.0 mol% Glucitol)
145000
432000
Water
307.5
218
N-Isopropylacrylamide/N-
isopropylmethacrylamide copolymer
(10.56 mol% N-Isopropylmethacrylamide)
55300
177000
Water
307.15
212
(30.00 mol% N-Isopropylmethacrylamide)
28800
92000
Water
309.75
212
(39.99 mol% N-Isopropylmethacrylamide)
23100
74000
Water
311.05
212
(59.89 mol% N-Isopropylmethacrylamide)
23100
74000
Water
314.65
212
(79.81 mol% N-Isopropylmethacrylamide)
16600
53000
Water
317.35
212
(89.99 mol% N-Isopropylmethacrylamide)
14700
47000
Water
318.75
212
Methylcellulose  (about 30 mol% methyl 
subsitution)
70000
Water
324.75
47
Methylcellulose/hydroxypropylcellulose 
copolymer (25 mol% methyl, 8 mol% 
hydroxypropyl subsitution)
80000
Water
340.15
63
Natural rubber
300000
Pentane
403
10
74500
2-Pentanone
274.45
7
Phenol-formaldehyde resin (acetylated)
2-Ethoxyethanol
378.2
200
Poly(acrylic acid)
120000
Tetrahydrofuran
268.3
189
Poly[bis(2,3-dimethoxypropanoxy)
phosphazene]
1070000
1500000
Water
317.15
183
Poly[bis(2-(2’-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy)
phosphazene]
667000
1000000
Water
338.15
183
Poly[bis(2,3-bis(2-methoxyethoxy)
propanoxy)phosphazene]
714000
1000000
Water
311.15
183
Poly[bis(2,3-bis(2-(2’-methoxyethoxy)
ethoxy)propanoxy)phosphazene]
1420000
1700000
Water
322.65
183
Poly[bis(2,3-bis(2-(2’-(2’’-dimethoxyethoxy)
ethoxy)ethoxy)propanoxy)phosphazene]
857000
1200000
Water
334.65
183
Polymer
Mn/g/mol
Mw/g/mol Mη/g/mol
Solvent
UCST/K LCST/K
Ref


--- PAGE 2342 ---
13-26
UPPER CRITICAL (UCST) AND LOWER CRITICAL (LCST) SOLUTION TEMPERATURES OF BINARY 
POLYMER SOLUTIONS (continued)
Poly(1-butene)  (atactic)
inﬁnite
Anisole
359.4
11
inﬁnite
Toluene
356.2
28
Poly(1-butene)  (isotactic)
inﬁnite
Anisole
362.3
11
530000
Cyclopentane
498
102
530000
2,2-Dimethylbutane
444
102
530000
2,5-Dimethylhexane
519
102
530000
3,4-Dimethylhexane
559
102
530000
2,3-Dimethylpentane
517
102
530000
2,4-Dimethylpentane
480
102
530000
3-Ethylpentane
523
102
530000
Heptane
509
102
inﬁnite
Hexane
464
102
530000
2-Methylbutane
416
102
inﬁnite
Nonane
564
102
530000
Octane
540
102
inﬁnite
Pentane
421
102
530000
2,2,3-Trimethylbutane
507
102
Poly(butyl methacrylate)
278000
470000
1-Butanol
287.15
132
278000
470000
Decane
357.25
132
278000
470000
Ethanol
315.25
132
278000
470000
Heptane
342.55
132
278000
470000
Octane
345.80
132
278000
470000
1-Pentanol
286.30
132
278000
470000
2-Propanol
294.90
132
278000
470000
2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
347.50
132
Poly(2-chlorostyrene)
inﬁnite
Benzene
298
40
Poly(4-chlorostyrene)
inﬁnite
Benzene
274.0
22
inﬁnite
2-(Butoxyethoxy)ethanol
323.25
46
inﬁnite
Butyl acetate
502.4
22
inﬁnite
tert-Butyl acetate
338.55
46
inﬁnite
Chlorobenzene
128.8
22
inﬁnite
2-(ethoxyethoxy)ethanol
300.95
46
inﬁnite
Ethyl acetate
613.2
22
inﬁnite
Ethylbenzene
283.2
22
inﬁnite
Ethylbenzene
258.45
46
inﬁnite
Ethyl chloroacetate
271.35
46
inﬁnite
Isopropyl acetate
348.65
46
inﬁnite
Isopropylbenzene
332.15
46
inﬁnite
Isopropyl chloroacetate
264.95
46
inﬁnite
Methyl chloroacetate
337.75
46
inﬁnite
Propyl acetate
908.7
22
inﬁnite
Tetrachloroethene
317.55
46
inﬁnite
Tetrachloromethane
323.85
46
inﬁnite
Toluene
236.8
22
Poly(decyl methacrylate)
390000
468000
1-Butanol
304.85
113
390000
468000
1-Pentanol
278.40
113
220000
252000
2-Propanol
346.85
132
Polymer
Mn/g/mol
Mw/g/mol Mη/g/mol
Solvent
UCST/K LCST/K
Ref


--- PAGE 2343 ---
TeamLRN
13-27
UPPER CRITICAL (UCST) AND LOWER CRITICAL (LCST) SOLUTION TEMPERATURES OF BINARY 
POLYMER SOLUTIONS (continued)
Polydimethylsiloxane (cyclic)
9810
10300
2,2-Dimethylpropane
433
133
9810
10300
Tetramethylsilane
448
133, 171
Polydimethylsiloxane
626000
Butane
392.95
53
inﬁnite
Decane
603
30
14750
16370
2,2-Dimethylpropane
428
133
inﬁnite
Dodecane
643
30
626000
Ethane
259.65
53
100000
Ethoxybenzene
341.99
108
inﬁnite
Heptane
528
30
inﬁnite
Hexadecane
708
30
inﬁnite
Hexane
493
30
inﬁnite
Octane
553
30
inﬁnite
Pentane
453
30
203000
Propane
340.15
53
14750
16370
Tetramethylsilane
443
133, 171
Poly(ethyl acrylate)
48000
1-Butanol
310.05
27
48000
Ethanol
301.15
27
380000
Methanol
287.25
27
48000
1-Propanol
305.15
27
Polyethylene  (branched)
8400
32000
Diphenyl ether
384.7
95, 98
24000
123000
Diphenyl ether
396.7
95, 98
65000
425000
Diphenyl ether
415.3
95, 98
Polyethylene  (linear)
20000
Anisole
368.15
24
20000
Benzyl acetate
459.65
24
20000
Benzyl phenyl ether
437.15
24
20000
Benzyl propionate
436.15
24
50900
Biphenyl
383.55
25
61100
Butyl acetate
448
497
70
20000
4-tert-Butylphenol
466.15
24
134000
Cyclohexane
518
101
20000
Cyclohexanone
389.65
24
134000
Cyclopentane
472
101
36700
49300
Decane
563.75
91
20000
1-Decanol
400.15
24
20000
Dibenzyl ether
448.65
24
134000
3,4-Dimethylhexane
515
101
134000
2,2-Dimethylpentane
399
101
134000
2,3-Dimethylpentane
463
101
134000
2,4-Dimethylpentane
395
101
12000
150000
Diphenyl ether
416.2
95, 98
97200
Diphenylmethane
400.25
25
60400
82600
Dodecane
610.85
91
218000
1-Dodecanol
405.15
141
134000
3-Ethylpentane
471
101
36700
49300
Heptane
464.70
91
20000
1-Heptanol
440.15
24
36700
49300
Hexane
414.65
91
7900
92000
1-Hexanol
458.15
154
20000
2-Methoxynaphthalene
427.65
24
Polymer
Mn/g/mol
Mw/g/mol Mη/g/mol
Solvent
UCST/K LCST/K
Ref


--- PAGE 2344 ---
13-28
UPPER CRITICAL (UCST) AND LOWER CRITICAL (LCST) SOLUTION TEMPERATURES OF BINARY 
POLYMER SOLUTIONS (continued)
20000
3-Methylbutyl acetate
407.15
24
134000
Methylcyclohexane
537
101
134000
Methylcyclopentane
488
101
60400
82600
Nonane
531.90
91
20000
1-Nonanol
431.15
24
20000
4-Nonylphenol
410.15
24
36700
49300
Octane
502.40
91
7900
92000
1-Octanol
426.65
154
20000
4-Octylphenol
424.65
24
134000
Pentane
353
101
20000
1-Pentanol
445.15
24
175000
Pentyl acetate
421
528
70
20000
4-tert-Pentylphenol
443.65
24
20000
Phenetole
366.65
24
134000
2,2,4,4-Tetramethylpentane
513
101
60400
82600
Tridecane
639.30
91
134000
2,2,3-Trimethylbutane
444
101
134000
2,3,4-Trimethylhexane
545
101
134000
2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
495
101
97700
135900
Undecane
583.95
91
Poly(ethylene glycol)
8000
tert-Butyl acetate
321.2
464.2
83
21200
tert-Butyl acetate
353.2
431.2
83
6100
6200
Water
404.79
185
10457
11615
Water
394.33
205
40800
151000
Water
378.25
205
Poly(ethylene oxide)-b-
poly[bis(methoxyethoxyethoxy)-
phosphazene] block copolymer 
(about 67 mol% Ethylene oxide)
22000
31500
Water
338
222
Poly(ethylene oxide)-b-poly(propylene oxide)
-b-poly(ethylene oxide) triblock copolymer 
(about 30 mol% Ethylene oxide)
4400
Water
286.65
209
Polyethylethylene
48000
52000
Diphenyl ether
411.2
95, 98
Poly(p-hexylstyrene)
inﬁnite
2-Butanone
302.6
135
Poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate)
77400
1-Butanol
337.25
35
233600
2-Butanol
287
35
233600
2-Metyl-1-propanol
342
35
77400
1,2,3-Propanetriol
345
35
77400
1-Propanol
311
35
Polyisobutylene
inﬁnite
Anisole
377
3
72000
Benzene
540.5
39
703000
Butane
264.75
53
inﬁnite
Cycloheptane
572
34
1500000
Cyclohexane
412
10
inﬁnite
Cyclooctane
637
34
1500000
Cyclopentane
344
10
inﬁnite
Decane
535
34
1500000
2,2-Dimethylbutane
376
10
Polymer
Mn/g/mol
Mw/g/mol Mη/g/mol
Solvent
UCST/K LCST/K
Ref


--- PAGE 2345 ---
TeamLRN
13-29
UPPER CRITICAL (UCST) AND LOWER CRITICAL (LCST) SOLUTION TEMPERATURES OF BINARY 
POLYMER SOLUTIONS (continued)
1500000
2,3-Dimethylbutane
404
10
inﬁnite
2,2-Dimethylhexane
454
34
inﬁnite
2,4-Dimethylhexane
458
34
inﬁnite
2,5-Dimethylhexane
446
34
inﬁnite
3,4-Dimethylhexane
497
34
inﬁnite
2,2-Dimethylpentane
404
34
inﬁnite
2,3-Dimethylpentane
451
34
inﬁnite
2,4-Dimethylpentane
403
34
inﬁnite
3,3-Dimethylpentane
451
34
inﬁnite
Diphenyl ether
306
3
inﬁnite
Decane
585
30
inﬁnite
Dodecane
582
34
inﬁnite
Ethylbenzene
249
3
inﬁnite
Ethylcyclopentane
524
34
inﬁnite
Ethyl heptanoate
306
3
inﬁnite
Ethyl hexanoate
330
3
inﬁnite
3-Ethylpentane
458
34
inﬁnite
Heptane
442
34
72000
Hexane
428.5
39
6030
2-Methylbutane
357.85
53
inﬁnite
Methylcyclohexane
526
34
inﬁnite
Methylcyclopentane
478
34
inﬁnite
2-Methylheptane
466
34
inﬁnite
3-Methylheptane
478
34
inﬁnite
2-Methylhexane
426
34
inﬁnite
3-Methylhexane
446
34
inﬁnite
2-Methylpentane
376
34
inﬁnite
3-Methylpentane
405
34
470
2-Methylpropane
387
10
72000
Octane
506.0
39
6030
Pentane
403.55
53
72000
Pentane
373.5
39
inﬁnite
Phenetole
357
3
470
Propane
358
10
inﬁnite
Propylcyclopentane
547
34
inﬁnite
Toluene
260
3
inﬁnite
2,2,3-Trimethylbutane
445
34
inﬁnite
2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
435
34
1,4-cis-Polyisoprene
780000
2,5-Dimethylhexane
474.15
140
780000
3,4-Dimethylhexane
520.15
140
780000
2,2-Dimethylpentane
445.15
140
780000
2,3-Dimethylpentane
484.15
140
780000
2,4-Dimethylpentane
442.15
140
780000
3-Methylpentane
483.15
140
780000
Heptane
488.15
140
780000
Hexane
434.15
140
780000
Nonane
541.15
140
780000
Octane
509.15
140
780000
2,2,4,4-Tetramethylpentane
518.15
140
780000
2,3,4-Trimethylhexane
548.15
140
780000
2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
471.15
140
1,4-trans-Polyisoprene
180000
2,5-Dimethylhexane
451.15
140
Polymer
Mn/g/mol
Mw/g/mol Mη/g/mol
Solvent
UCST/K LCST/K
Ref


--- PAGE 2346 ---
13-30
UPPER CRITICAL (UCST) AND LOWER CRITICAL (LCST) SOLUTION TEMPERATURES OF BINARY 
POLYMER SOLUTIONS (continued)
180000
3,4-Dimethylhexane
521.15
140
180000
2,2-Dimethylpentane
405.15
140
180000
2,3-Dimethylpentane
460.15
140
180000
2,4-Dimethylpentane
404.15
140
180000
3-Methylpentane
473.15
140
180000
Heptane
467.15
140
180000
Hexane
407.15
140
180000
Nonane
540.15
140
180000
Octane
503.15
140
180000
2,2,4,4-Tetramethylpentane
519.15
140
180000
2,3,4-Trimethylhexane
548.15
140
Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)
5400
14000
Water
307.45
146
146000
530000
Water
305.85
146
Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)-poly[(N-
acetylimino)ethylene] block copolymer 
(80 wt% N-Isopropylacrylamide)
5500
Water
306.2
223
Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)-poly[(N-
acetylimino)ethylene] graft copolymer 
(75 wt% N-Isopropylacrylamide)
6030
Water
306.2
223
Poly(N-isopropylmethacrylamide)
6250
20000
Water
319.95
212
Poly(methyl methacrylate)
127000
Acetonitrile
267.15
16
970000
Acetonitrile
303.15
16
50000
1-Butanol
353.25
2
inﬁnite
2-Butanone
482
80
inﬁnite
1-Chlorobutane
320
463
80
970000
2,2-Dimethyl-3-pentanone
301.55
16
127000
2,4-Dimethyl-3-pentanone
280.15
16
200000
264000
2-Ethoxyethanol
312.15
196
77000
Ethyl acetate
290
533
190
127000
2-Ethylbutanal
264.65
16
inﬁnite
3-Heptanone
307.7
126
970000
4-Heptanone
299.95
16
inﬁnite
3-Hexanone
522
80
inﬁnite
Methyl acetate
451
80
50000
1-Methyl-4-
isopropylbenzene
400.15
2
1400000
2-Octanone
321.15
16
572400
595300
3-Octanone
329.88
166
inﬁnite
3-Pentanone
506
80
50000
1-Propanol
349.95
2
inﬁnite
2-Propanone
439
80
200000
264000
Tetra(ethylene glycol)
390.15
196
400000
Toluene
225.35
2
50000
Trichloromethane
231.15
2
200000
264000
Tri(ethylene glycol)
407.15
196
Poly(methyl methacrylate)  (isotactic)
inﬁnite
Acetonitrile
301
461
80
inﬁnite
2-Butanone
464
80
inﬁnite
1-Chlorobutane
309
454
80
inﬁnite
4-Heptanone
319
522
80
Polymer
Mn/g/mol
Mw/g/mol Mη/g/mol
Solvent
UCST/K LCST/K
Ref


--- PAGE 2347 ---
TeamLRN
13-31
UPPER CRITICAL (UCST) AND LOWER CRITICAL (LCST) SOLUTION TEMPERATURES OF BINARY 
POLYMER SOLUTIONS (continued)
inﬁnite
3-Hexanone
279
511
80
inﬁnite
Methyl acetate
441
80
inﬁnite
3-Pentanone
497
80
inﬁnite
2-Propanone
428
80
Poly(4-methyl-1-pentene)  (isotactic)
152000
Butane
388
102
152000
Cyclopentane
505
102
152000
2,2-Dimethylbutane
462
102
152000
2,2-Dimethylpentane
499
102
152000
2,4-Dimethylpentane
499
102
inﬁnite
Diphenyl
467.8
62
inﬁnite
Diphenyl ether
483.2
62
inﬁnite
Diphenylmethane
449.8
62
152000
3-Ethylpentane
532
102
152000
Heptane
522
102
152000
Hexane
487
102
152000
2-Methylbutane
431
102
152000
Nonane
579
102
152000
Octane
553
102
152000
Pentane
441
102
152000
2,2,3-Trimethylbutane
521
102
Poly(α-methylstyrene)
58500
61400
Butyl acetate
262.05
457.15
181
99100
113000
Cyclohexane
293.55
152
26000
31200
Cyclopentane
276.7
435.95
181
289000
trans-
Decahydronaphthalene
273
181
69500
76500
Hexyl acetate
285.05
508.15
181
72000
75600
Methylcyclohexane
328.9
203
58500
61400
Pentyl acetate
287.1
484.6
181
Poly(2-methyl-5-vinylpyridine)
600000
Butyl acetate
287.95
20
263000
Ethyl butyrate
319.05
20
335000
Ethyl propionate
293.55
20
275000
3-Methylbutyl acetate
314.75
20
335000
4-Methyl-2-pentanone
299.95
20
170000
2-Methylpropyl acetate
312.35
20
165000
Pentyl acetate
316.95
20
284000
Propionitrile
262.35
20
152000
Propyl acetate
282.65
20
181000
Propyl propionate
312.15
20
233000
Tetrahydronaphthalene
316.95
20
Poly(1-pentene)  (isotactic)
4500000
Cyclopentane
502
102
4500000
2,2-Dimethylbutane
457
102
4500000
3,4-Dimethylhexane
>569
102
4500000
2,2-Dimethylpentane
502
102
4500000
2,3-Dimethylpentane
529
102
4500000
2,4-Dimethylpentane
493
102
4500000
3-Ethylpentane
537
102
4500000
Heptane
522
102
4500000
Hexane
482
102
4500000
2-Methylbutane
422
102
4500000
Octane
556
102
Polymer
Mn/g/mol
Mw/g/mol Mη/g/mol
Solvent
UCST/K LCST/K
Ref


--- PAGE 2348 ---
13-32
UPPER CRITICAL (UCST) AND LOWER CRITICAL (LCST) SOLUTION TEMPERATURES OF BINARY 
POLYMER SOLUTIONS (continued)
4500000
Pentane
433
102
4500000
2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
527
102
Polypropylene  (atactic)
inﬁnite
Diphenyl ether
426.5
9
inﬁnite
Diethyl ether
383
68
242000
Heptane
511
101
inﬁnite
Hexane
441
68
242000
2-Methylbutane
413
101
242000
Methylcyclohexane
564
101
inﬁnite
Pentane
397
68
Polypropylene  (isotactic)
28000
Benzyl phenyl ether
429.2
31
28000
Benzyl propionate
405.2
31
28000
1-Butanol
395.2
31
28000
4-tert-Butylphenol
413.2
31
242000
Cyclohexane
540
101
242000
Cyclopentane
495
101
28000
Dibenzyl ether
433.2
31
242000
2,2-Dimethylbutane
441
101
242000
2,3-Dimethylbutane
465
101
242000
3,4-Dimethylhexane
553
101
242000
2,2-Dimethylpentane
489
101
242000
2,3-Dimethylpentane
513
101
242000
2,4-Dimethylpentane
481
101
28000
Diphenyl
388.2
31
28000
Diphenyl ether
395.2
31
28000
Diphenylmethane
389.7
31
242000
3-Ethylpentane
520
101
28000
4-Ethylphenol
457.2
31
242000
Heptane
511
101
242000
Hexane
470
101
242000
2-Methylbutane
413
101
28000
3-Methylbutyl benzyl ether
384.2
31
242000
Methylcyclohexane
564
101
242000
Methylcyclopentane
518
101
28000
4-Methylphenol
479.2
31
28000
2-Methyl-1-propanol
395.2
31
242000
Nonane
571
101
242000
Octane
542
101
28000
4-Octylphenol
379.2
31
28000
4-Isooctylphenol
383.2
31
242000
Pentane
422
101
242000
2,2,4,4-Tetramethylpentane
548
101
242000
2,2,3-Trimethylbutane
511
101
242000
2,3,4-Trimethylhexane
585
101
242000
2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
510
101
Poly(propylene glycol)
1000
Hexane
288.15
88
575
Water
318.2
65
Polystyrene
34900
37000
Benzene
538.7
61
62600
Butanedioic acid dimethyl 
ester
335.15
2
3700
4000
1-Butanol
383.45
154
Polymer
Mn/g/mol
Mw/g/mol Mη/g/mol
Solvent
UCST/K LCST/K
Ref


--- PAGE 2349 ---
TeamLRN
13-33
UPPER CRITICAL (UCST) AND LOWER CRITICAL (LCST) SOLUTION TEMPERATURES OF BINARY 
POLYMER SOLUTIONS (continued)
91700
97200
2-Butanone
448.8
61
545500
600000
Butyl acetate
489
181
104000
110000
tert-Butyl acetate
250.0
417.9
74
62600
Butyl stearate
387.15
2
18400
19200
1-Chlorododecane
274.65
154
18400
19200
1-Chlorohexadecane
337.05
154
18400
19200
1-Chlorooctadecane
365.55
154
18400
19200
1-Chlorotetradecane
309.35
154
46400
51000
Cyclodecane
278.9
128
46400
51000
Cycloheptane
276.2
128
34900
37000
Cyclohexane
285.6
510.9
60
236000
Cyclohexanol
353.5
8
46400
51000
Cyclooctane
275.2
128
91700
97200
Cyclopentane
275.2
445.5
61
91500
97000
trans-
Decahydronaphthalene
281.95
81
4800
Decane
360.95
154
3700
4000
1-Decanol
375.15
154
570000
Decyl acetate
650
64
18700
19800
Diethyl ether
235.6
314.5
51
187000
200000
Diethyl malonate
285.8
589.6
74
47200
50000
Diethyl oxalate
280.05
131
151000
160000
Dimethoxymethane
401.2
51
240000
1,4-Dimethylcyclohexane
387
482
116
62600
Dimethyl malonate
409.15
2
62600
Dimethyl oxalate
453.15
2
116000
123000
Dodecadeuterocyclohexane
298.10
224
25000
Dodecadeuteromethylcyclo
pentane
310.07
180
4800
Dodecane
368.65
154
3700
4000
1-Dodecanol
379.75
154
inﬁnite
Dodecyl acetate
285.2
206
104000
110000
Ethyl acetate
213.9
435.4
72
104000
110000
Ethyl butanoate
490.8
74
221000
239000
Ethylcyclohexane
330.52
18
9440
10000
Ethyl formate
272
451
74
900000
bis(2-Ethylhexyl) phthalate
283.05
136
4530
4800
Heptane
359
477
112
3700
4000
1-Dexadecanol
386.25
154
5500
5770
1,1,1,3,3,3-Hexadeutero-2-
propanone
270
436
157
1920
2030
Hexane
318
470
112
62600
Hexanoic acid
448.15
2
3700
4000
1-Hexanol
372.15
154
62600
3-Hexanol
396.65
2
90000
Hexyl acetate
578
64
104000
110000
Methyl acetate
284.2
415.7
72
104000
110000
3-Methyl-1-butyl acetate
210.1
510.1
72
91700
97200
Methylcyclohexane
321.8
505.9
60
10750
11500
Methylcyclopentane
295
480
157
104000
110000
2-Methyl-1-propyl acetate
210.4
468.5
72
48000
Nitroethane
303.1
151
4800
Octadecane
403.55
154
3700
4000
1-Octadecanol
390.55
154
4530
4800
Octane
353
527
112
Polymer
Mn/g/mol
Mw/g/mol Mη/g/mol
Solvent
UCST/K LCST/K
Ref


--- PAGE 2350 ---
13-34
UPPER CRITICAL (UCST) AND LOWER CRITICAL (LCST) SOLUTION TEMPERATURES OF BINARY 
POLYMER SOLUTIONS (continued)
3700
4000
1-Octanol
372.35
154
62600
1-Octene
355.15
2
4800
Pentadecane
385.25
154
1100
Pentane
292
137
3700
4000
1-Pentanol
375.05
154
219800
233000
Pentyl acetate
519
181
100000
1-Phenyldecane
283.60
105
5500
5770
2-Propanone
251
452
157
12750
13500
Propionitrile
312
187
104000
110000
Propyl acetate
183.7
469.0
72
104000
110000
2-Propyl acetate
220.9
414.2
72
3700
4000
1-Tetradecanol
383.25
154
34900
37000
Toluene
567.2
60
62600
Vinyl acetate
384.15
2
Polystyrene (three-arm star)
230000
Cyclohexane
297.1
496.8
93
Polystyrene (four-arm star)
155000
Cyclohexane
294.13
199
Poly(trimethylene oxide)
inﬁnite
Cyclohexane
300
79
Poly(vinyl alcohol)
40000
Water
514
45
Poly(N-vinyl caprolactam)
150000
Water
306.45
217
Poly(vinyl chloride)
55000
Dibutyl phthalate
353
114
55000
Tricresyl phosphate
383
114
85000
Dimethyl phthalate
355
219
Poly(N-vinylisobutyramide)
66000
105600
Water
313.25
208
Poly(vinyl methyl ether)
46500
98600
Deuterium oxide
307.2
173
83000
155000
Water
306.95
146
Poly(N-vinyl-N-propylacetamide)
30000
Water
313.5
176
Styrene/acrylonitrile copolymer 
(21.1 wt% acrylonitrile)
inﬁnite
Toluene
325.4
52
(23.2 wt% Acrylonitrile)
inﬁnite
Toluene
355.1
52
(25.0 wt% Acrylonitrile)
90000
147000
Toluene
313.15
198
(51.0 wt% Acrylonitrile)
347000
Ethyl acetate
344.15
107
Styrene/methyl methacrylate copolymer 
(52.0 mol% Styrene)
inﬁnite
Cyclohexanol
334.65
38
Styrene/α-methylstyrene copolymer 
(20.0 mol% Styrene)
100000
114000
Butyl acetate
288.85
453.05
181
100000
114000
Cyclohexane
285.85
484.85
181
100000
114000
Cyclopentane
290.95
421.05
181
100000
114000
trans-
Decahydronaphthalene
264.15
181
100000
114000
Hexyl acetate
288.55
514.15
181
100000
114000
Pentyl acetate
303.15
480.65
181
Polymer
Mn/g/mol
Mw/g/mol Mη/g/mol
Solvent
UCST/K LCST/K
Ref


--- PAGE 2351 ---
TeamLRN
13-35
UPPER CRITICAL (UCST) AND LOWER CRITICAL (LCST) SOLUTION TEMPERATURES OF BINARY 
POLYMER SOLUTIONS (continued)
REFERENCES
1a. Koningsveld, R., Stockmayer, W.H., and Nies, E., Polymer Phase Diagrams, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2001.
1b. Kamide, K., Thermodynamics of Polymer Solutions, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1990.
2. Jenckel, E. and Gorke, K., Z. Naturforsch., 5a, 317, 556, 1950.
3. Fox, T.G. and Flory, P.J., J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 73, 1909, 1951.
4. Fox, T.G. and Flory, P.J., J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 73, 1915, 1951.
5. Mandelkern, L. and Flory, P.J., J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 74, 2517, 1952.
6. Shultz, A.R. and Flory, P.J., J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 74, 4760, 1952.
7. Wagner, H.L. and Flory, P.J., J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 74, 195, 1952.
8. Shultz, A.R.and Flory, P.J., J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 75, 3888, 1953.
9. Kinsinger, J.B. and Wessling, R.A., J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 81, 2908, 1959.
10. Freeman, P.I. and Rowlinson, J.S., Polymer, 1, 20, 1960.
11. Krigbaum, W.R., Kurz, J.E., and Smith, P., J. Phys. Chem., 65, 1984, 1961.
12. Morneau, G.A., Roth, P.I., and Shultz, A.R., J. Polym. Sci., 55, 609, 1961.
13. Debye, P., Coll, H., and Woermann, D., J. Chem. Phys., 32, 939, 1960.
14. Debye, P., Coll, H., and Woermann, D., J. Chem. Phys., 33, 1746, 1960.
15. Debye, P., Chu, B., and Woermann, D., J. Chem. Phys., 36, 1803, 1962.
16. Fox, T.G., Polymer, 3, 111, 1962.
17. Ham, J.S., Bolen, M.C., and Hughes, J.K., J. Polym. Sci., 57, 25, 1962.
18. Debye, P., Woermann, D., and Chu, B., J. Polym. Sci.: Part A, 1, 255, 1963.
19. Allen, G. and Baker, C.H., Polymer, 6, 181, 1965.
20. Gechele, G.B., Crescentini, L., J. Polym. Sci.: Part A, 3, 3599, 1965.
21. Myrat, C.D. and Rowlinson, J.S., Polymer, 6, 645, 1965.
22. Kubo, K. and Ogino, K., Sci. Pap. Coll. Art. Sci. Univ. Tokyo, 16, 193, 1966.
23. Rehage, G., Moeller, D., and Ernst, O., Makromol.Chem., 88, 232, 1965.
24. Nakajima, A., Fujiwara, H., and Hamada, F., J. Polym. Sci.: Part A-2, 4, 507, 1966.
25. Nakajima, A., Hamada, F., and Hayashi, S., J. Polym. Sci.: Part C, 15, 285, 1966.
26. Koningsveld, R., Proefschrift Univ. Leiden, Heerlen, 1967.
27. Llopis, J., Albert, A., and Usobinaga P., Eur. Polym. J., 3, 259, 1967.
28. Moraglio, G., Gianotti, G., and Danusso, F., Eur. Polym. J., 3, 251, 1967.
29. Orwoll, R.A. and Flory, P.J., J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 89, 6822, 1967.
30. Patterson, D., Delmas, G., and Somcynsky, T., Polymer, 8, 503, 1967.
31. Nakajima, A. and Fujiwara, H., J. Polym. Sci.: Part A-2, 6, 723, 1968.
32. Rehage, G. and Koningsveld, R., J. Polym. Sci.: Polym. Lett., 6, 421, 1968.
33. Andreeva, V. M., et al., Vysokomol. Soedin., Ser. B, 11, 555, 1969.
34. Bardin, J.-M. and Patterson, D., Polymer, 10, 247, 1969.
35. Dusek, K., Coll. Czech. Chem. Commun., 34, 3309, 1969.
36. Delmas, G. and Patterson, D., J. Polym. Sci.: Part C, 30, 1, 1970.
37. Koningsveld, R., Kleintjens, L.A., and Shultz, A.R., J. Polym. Sci.: Part A-2, 8, 1261, 1970.
38. Kotaka, T., et al., Polym. J., 1, 245, 1970.
Triﬂuoronitrosomethane/tetraﬂuoroethylene 
copolymer  (1:1) alternating
inﬁnite
1,1,2-Trichloro-1,2,2-
triﬂuoroethane
301.6
12
N-Vinylacetamide/vinyl acetate copolymer
(58 mol% Vinyl acetate) 
30000
57000
Water
340.15
225
(63 mol% Vinyl acetate) 
27000
48600
Water
323.15
225
(78 mol% Vinyl acetate) 
26000
46800
Water
282.15
225
Vinyl alcohol/vinyl butyrate copolymer
(7.5 mol% Butyralized PVA)
inﬁnite
Water
408.0
298.25
121
N-Vinylcaprolactam/N-vinylamine copolymer 
(3.8 mol% Vinyl amine)
160000
Water
308.8
176
N-Vinylformamide/vinyl acetate copolymer
(60 mol% Vinyl acetate)
24000
45600
Water
310.15
225
(66 mol% Vinyl acetate)
25000
47500
Water
291.15
225
(73 mol% Vinyl acetate)
23000
50600
Water
277.15
225
Polymer
Mn/g/mol
Mw/g/mol Mη/g/mol
Solvent
UCST/K LCST/K
Ref


--- PAGE 2397 ---
TeamLRN
14-41
SPEED OF SOUND IN VARIOUS MEDIA
The speed of sound in various solids, liquids, and gases is given in these tables. While only a single parameter v is needed for liquids and gases,
sound propagation in isotropic solids is characterized by three velocity parameters. For a solid of infinite extent (or of finite extent if all dimensions
are much larger than a wavelength, there are two relevant quantities,
v1: velocity of longitudinal waves
vs: velocity of shear waves.
For a cylindrical rod with diameter much smaller than a wavelength,
vext: velocity of extensional waves along the rod. (Torsional waves in the rod are propagated at the same speed as sheer waves in an infinite solid.)
Table 1 lists values for a variety of solid materials. Table 2 covers gases liquids and gases; values for cryogenic liquids are given at the normal
boiling point. Table 3 gives the speed of sound in pure water and in seawater of salinity S = 3.5% as a function of temperature. All values are in meters
per second and are given for normal atmospheric pressure.
REFERENCES
1. Gray, D.E., Ed., American Institute of Physics Handbook, Third Edition, McGraw Hill, New York, 1972.
2. Anderson, H.L., Ed., A Physicist’s Desk Reference, American Institute of Physics, New York, 1989.
3. Younglove, B.A., Thermophysical Proeprties of Fluids. Part I, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 11, Suppl. 1, 1982.
4. Younglove, B.A., and Ely, J.F., Thermophysical Properties of Fluids. Part II, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 16, 577, 1987.
5. Haar, L., Gallagher, J.S., and Kell, G.S., NBS/NRC Steam Tables, Hemisphere Publishing Corp., New York, 1984.
6. Mason, W.P., Physical Acoustics and the Properties of Solids, D. Van Nostrand Co., Princeton, N.J., 1958.
7. Landolt-Börnstein, Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in Science and Technology, New Series, II/5, Molecular Acoustics, Springer-
Verlag, Heidelberg, 1967.
TABLE 1
Speed of Sound in Solids at Room Temperature
Name
v1/m s–1
vs/m s–1
vext/m s–1
Metals
Aluminum, rolled
6420
3040
5000
Beryllium
12890
8880
12870
Brass (70 Cu, 30 Zn)
4700
2110
3480
Constantan
5177
2625
4270
Copper, annealed
4760
2325
3810
Copper, rolled
5010
2270
3750
Duralumin 17S
6320
3130
5150
Gold, hard-drawn
3240
1200
2030
Iron, cast
4994
2809
4480
Iron, electrolytic
5950
3240
5120
Iron, Armco
5960
3240
5200
Lead, annealed
2160
700
1190
Lead, rolled
1960
690
1210
Magnesium, annealed
5770
3050
4940
Molybdenum
6250
3350
5400
Monel metal
5350
2720
4400
Nickel
6040
3000
4900
Platinum
3260
1730
2800
Silver
3650
1610
2680
Steel (1% C)
5940
3220
5180
Name
v1/m s–1
vs/m s–1
vext/m s–1
Steel, 347 Stainless
5790
3100
5000
Steel, K9
5940
3250
5250
Tin, rolled
3320
1670
2730
Titanium
6070
3125
5090
Tungsten, annealed
5220
2890
4620
Tungsten, drawn
5410
2640
4320
Zinc, rolled
4210
2440
3850
Other materials
Fused silica
5968
3764
5760
Glass, heavy silicate flint
3980
2380
3720
Glass, light borate crown
5100
2840
4540
Glass, pyrex
5640
3280
5170
Lucite
2680
1100
1840
Nylon 6-6
2620
1070
1800
Polyethylene
1950
540
920
Polystyrene
2350
1120
1840
Rubber, butyl
1830
Rubber, gum
1550
Rubber, neoprene
1600
Tungsten carbide
6655
3980
6220


--- PAGE 2405 ---
TeamLRN
Section 15: Practical Laboratory Data
        Standard ITS-90 Thermocouple Tables
        Secondary Reference Points on the ITS-90 Temperature Scale
        Laboratory Solvents and other Liquid Reagents
        Miscibility of Organic Solvents
        Density of Solvents as a Function of Temperature
        Dependence of Boiling Point on Pressure
        Ebullioscopic Constants for Calculation of Boiling Point Elevation
        Cryoscopic Constants for Calculation of Freezing Point Depression
        Freezing Point Lowering by Electrolytes in Aqueous Solution
        Correction of Barometer Readings to 0°C Temperature
        Determination of Relative Humidity from Dew Point
        Determination of Relative Humidity from Wet and Dry Bulb Temperatures
        Constant Humidity Solutions
        Standard Salt Solutions for Humidity Calibration
        Low Temperature Baths for Maintaining Constant Temperature
        Metals and Alloys with Low Melting Temperature
        Wire Tables
        Characteristics of Particles and Particle Dispersoids
        Density of Various Solids
        Density of Ethanol-Water Mixtures
        Dielectric Strength of Insulating Materials
        Coefficient of Friction
        Flame Temperatures
        Allocation of Frequencies in the Radio Spectrum


--- PAGE 2421 ---
TeamLRN
15-14
SECONDARY REFERENCE POINTS ON THE ITS-90 TEMPERATURE SCALE
The International Temperature Scale of 1990 is described tin Section 1 of this Handbook, where the deﬁning ﬁxed points are listed. The Consul-
tative Committee on Thermometry (CCT) of the International Committee on Weights and Measures (CIPM), which oversees the temperature scale,
has recommended a number of secondary reference points whose values have been accurately determined with respect to the primary ﬁxed points.
The most accurate of these, referred to as “ﬁrst quality points”, satisfy several criteria involving purity of the material, reproducibility, and docu-
mentation of the measurements. The CCT also lists “second quality points” that do not yet satisfy all the criteria but are still useful. Taken together,
these secondary reference points, help ﬁll in the gaps between the primary ﬁxed points.
The table below describes these secondary reference points. The best values resulting from the CCT evaluation are listed on both the Kelvin and
Celsius scales, along with an estimate of uncertainty. Full details are given in the reference.
The entries within each quality group are listed in order of increasing temperature.
REFERENCE
Bedford, R. E., Bonnier, G., Maas, H., and Pavese, F., Metrologia 33, 133, 1996.
Substance
Type of Transition
T90/K
t90/°C
Uncert.
First quality points
Zinc
Superconductive transition
0.8500
-272.300
0.0030
Aluminum
Superconductive transition
1.1810
-271.9690
0.0025
Helium (4He)
Superﬂuid transition
2.1768
-270.9732
0.0001
Indium
Superconductive transition
3.4145
-269.7355
0.0025
Lead
Superconductive transition
7.1997
-265.9503
0.0025
Niobium
Superconductive transition
9.2880
-263.8620
0.0025
Deuterium (2H2)
Triple point (equilibrium D2)
18.689
-254.461
0.001
Deuterium (2H2)
Triple point (normal D2)
18.724
-254.426
0.001
Neon (20Ne)
Triple point
24.541
-248.609
0.001
Neon
Boiling point
27.097
-246.053
0.001
Nitrogen
Triple point
63.151
-209.999
0.001
Nitrogen
Boiling point
77.352
-195.798
0.002
Argon
Boiling point
87.303
-185.847
0.001
Oxygen
Condensation point
90.197
-182.953
0.001
Methane
Triple point
90.694
-182.456
0.001
Xenon
Triple point
161.405
-111.745
0.001
Carbon dioxide
Triple point
216.592
-56.558
0.001
Mercury
Freezing point
234.3210
-38.8290
0.0005
Water
Ice point
273.15
0
Gallium
Triple point
302.9166
29.7666
0.0001
Water
Boiling point
373.124
99.974
0.001
Indium
Triple point
429.7436
156.5936
0.0002
Bismuth
Freezing point
544.552
271.402
0.001
Cadmium
Freezing point
594.219
321.069
0.001
Lead
Freezing point
600.612
327.462
0.001
Antimony
Freezing point
903.778
630.628
0.001
Copper/71.9% silver
Eutectic melting point
1052.78
779.63
0.05
Palladium
Freezing point
1828.0
1554.8
0.1
Platinum
Freezing point
2041.3
1768.2
0.4
Rhodium
Freezing point
2236
1963
3
Iridium
Freezing point
2719
2446
6
Molybdenum
Melting point
2895
2622
4
Tungsten
Melting point
3687
3414
7


--- PAGE 2422 ---
15-15
SECONDARY REFERENCE POINTS ON THE ITS-90 TEMPERATURE SCALE (continued)
Second quality points
Hydrogen
Triple point (normal H2)
13.952
-259.198
0.002
Hydrogen
Boiling point (normal H2)
20.388
-252.762
0.002
Oxygen
- transition
23.868
-249.282
0.005
Nitrogen
- transition
35.614
-237.536
0.006
Oxygen
- transition
43.796
-229.354
0.001
Krypton
Triple point
115.775
-157.375
0.001
Carbon dioxide
Sublimation point
194.686
-78.464
0.003
Sulfur hexaﬂuoride
Triple point
223.554
-49.596
0.005
Gallium/20% indium
Eutectic melting point
288.800
15.650
0.001
Gallium/8% tin
Eutectic melting point
293.626
20.476
0.002
Diphenyl ether
Triple point
300.014
26.864
0.001
Ethylene carbonate
Triple point
309.465
36.315
0.001
Succinonitrile
Triple point
331.215
58.065
0.002
Sodium
Freezing point
370.944
97.794
0.005
Benzoic acid
Triple point
395.486
122.336
0.002
Benzoic acid
Freezing point
395.502
122.352
0.007
Mercury
Boiling point
629.769
356.619
0.004
Sulfur
Boiling point
717.764
444.614
0.002
Copper/66.9% aluminum
Eutectic melting point
840.957
567.807
0.010
Silver/30% aluminum
Eutectic melting point
840.957
567.807
0.002
Sodium chloride
Freezing point
1075.168
802.018
0.011
Sodium
Boiling point
1156.090
882.940
0.005
Nickel
Freezing point
1728
1455
1
Cobalt
Freezing point
1768
1495
3
Iron
Freezing point
1811
1538
3
Titanium
Melting point
1943
1670
2
Zirconium
Melting point
2127
1854
8
Aluminum oxide
Melting point
2326
2053
2
Ruthenium
Melting point
2606
2333
10
Substance
Type of Transition
T90/K
t90/°C
Uncert.


--- PAGE 2423 ---
TeamLRN
15-16
LABORATORY SOLVENTS AND OTHER LIQUID REAGENTS
This table summarizes the properties of 575 liquids that are commonly used in the laboratory as solvents or chemical reagents. The properties
tabulated are:
Data on the temperature dependence of viscosity, dielectric constant, and vapor pressure can be found in the pertinent tables in this Handbook.
REFERENCES
1. Lide, D. R., Handbook of Organic Solvents, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1994.
2. Lide, D. R., and Kehiaian, H. V., Handbook of Thermophysical and Thermochemical Data, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1994.
3. Riddick, J. A., Bunger, W. B., and Sakano, T. K., Organic Solvents, Fourth Edition, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1986.
4. Fire Protection Guide to Hazardous Materials, 11th Edition, National Fire Protection Association, Quincy, MA, 1994.
5. Urben, P. G., Ed., Bretherick’s Handbook of Reactive Chemical Hazards, 5th Edition, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, 1995
Mr :
Molecular weight
tm:
Melting point in ˚C
tb :
Normal boiling point in ˚C
ρ:
Density in g/mL at the temperature in ˚C indicated by the superscript
η:
Viscosity in mPa s (1 mPa s = 1 centipoise)
ε:
Dielectric constant 
µ:
Dipole moment in D
cp:
Speciﬁc heat capacity of the liquid at constant pressure at 25˚C in J/g K
vp:
Vapor pressure at 25˚C in kPa (1 kPa = 7.50 mmHg)
FP:
Flash point in ˚C
Fl.Lim:
Flammable (explosive) limit in air in percent by volume
IT
Autoignition temperature in ˚C
TLV
Threshold limit for allowable airborne concentration in parts per million by volume at 
25˚C and atmospheric pressure
Name
Mol. 
Form.
Mr
tm/°C
tb/°C
/
g mL–1
/
mPa s
 


 
/D
 
cp/
J g–1K–1
vp/
kPa
FP/
°C
Fl. Lim.
IT/
°C
TLV/
ppm
Acetaldehyde
C2H4O
44.052
-123.37
20.1
0.783418
21.0
2.750
2.020
120
-39
4-60%
175
Acetic acid
C2H4O2
60.052
16.64
117.9
1.044625
1.056
6.20
1.70
2.053
2.07
39
4-20%
463
10
Acetic anhydride
C4H6O3
102.089
-74.1
139.5
1.08220
0.843
22.45
≈2.8
1.648
0.680
49
2.7-10.3%
316
5
Acetone
C3H6O
58.079
-94.7
56.05
0.784525
0.306
21.01
2.88
2.175
30.8
-20
3-13%
465
500
Acetone cyanohydrin
C4H7NO
85.105
-19
95
0.93219
74
2.2-12%
688
Acetonitrile
C2H3N
41.052
-43.82
81.65
0.785720
0.369
36.64
3.92
2.229
11.9
6
3-16%
524
40
Acetophenone
C8H8O
120.149
20.5
202
1.028120
1.681
17.44
3.02
1.703
0.049
77
570
10
Acetyl bromide
C2H3BrO
122.948
-96
76
1.662516
16.2
Acetyl chloride
C2H3ClO
78.497
-112.8
50.7
1.105120
0.368
15.8
2.72
1.491
38.4
4
390
Acrolein
C3H4O
56.063
-87.7
52.6
0.84020
3.1
36.2
-26
2.8-31%
220
Acrylic acid
C3H4O2
72.063
12.5
141
1.051120
2.022
50
2.4-8%
438
2
Acrylonitrile
C3H3N
53.063
-83.48
77.3
0.800725
33.0
3.87
2.05
14.1
0
3-17%
481
2
Allyl alcohol
C3H6O
58.079
-129
97.0
0.854020
1.218
19.7
1.60
2.392
3.14
21
3-18%
378
0.5
Allylamine
C3H7N
57.095
-88.2
53.3
0.75820
1.2
33.1
-29
2-22%
374
2-Amino-2-methyl-1-propanol
C4H11NO
89.136
25.5
165.5
0.93420
67
3-Amino-1-propanol
C3H9NO
75.109
12.4
187.5
0.982426
80
Aniline
C6H7N
93.127
-6.02
184.17
1.021720
3.85
7.06
1.13
2.061
0.090
70
1.3-11%
615
2
Anisole
C7H8O
108.138
-37.13
153.7
0.994020
1.056
4.30
1.38
1.840
0.472
52
475
Antimony(V) chloride
Cl5Sb
299.024
4
140 dec
2.34
3.222
Antimony(V) ﬂuoride
F5Sb
216.752
8.3
141
3.10
Arsenic(III) chloride
AsCl3
181.280
-16
130
2.150
1.59
Benzaldehyde
C7H6O
106.122
-57.1
178.8
1.040125
17.85
3.0
1.621
0.169
63
192
Benzene
C6H6
78.112
5.49
80.09
0.876520
0.604
2.2825
0
1.741
12.7
-11
1-8%
498
0.5
Benzeneacetonitrile
C8H7N
117.149
-23.8
233.5
1.020515
17.87
3.5
113
Benzeneethanamine
C8H11N
121.180
<0
195
0.964025
Benzeneethanol
C8H10O
122.164
-27
218.2
1.020220
12.31
2.068
96
Benzenemethanethiol
C7H8S
124.204
-30
194.5
1.05820
4.705
Benzenesulfonyl chloride
C6H5ClO2S
176.621
14.5
251 dec
1.347015
28.90
Benzenethiol
C6H6S
110.177
-14.93
169.1
1.077520
4.26
1.23
1.572
0.5
Benzonitrile
C7H5N
103.122
-13.99
191.1
1.009315
1.267
25.9
4.18
1.602
0.11
Benzoyl chloride
C7H5ClO
140.567
-0.4
197.2
1.212020
23.0
0.084
72


--- PAGE 2424 ---
15-17
LABORATORY SOLVENTS AND OTHER LIQUID REAGENTS (continued)
Benzyl acetate
C9H10O2
150.174
-51.3
213
1.055020
5.34
1.22
0.989
90
460
10
Benzyl alcohol
C7H8O
108.138
-15.4
205.31
1.041924
5.47
11.916
1.71
2.015
0.015
93
436
Benzylamine
C7H9N
107.153
185
0.981320
1.624
5.18
0.096
2,2’-Bioxirane
C4H6O2
86.090
2.0
144
1.11320
Bis(2-aminoethyl)amine
C4H13N3
103.166
-39
207
0.956920
12.62
1.9
2.462
0.03
98
2-7%
358
1
N,N’-Bis(2-aminoethyl)-1,2-
ethanediamine
C6H18N4
146.234
12
266.5
10.76
Bis(2-chloroethyl) ether
C4H8Cl2O
143.012
-51.9
178.5
1.2220
21.20
2.6
1.545
0.143
55
3%-
369
5
Bis(chloromethyl) ether
C2H4Cl2O
114.958
-41.5
106
1.32315
3.51
0.001
Bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate
C24H38O4
390.557
-55
384
0.98125
5.3
2.84
1.804
218
Bis(2-hydroxyethyl) sulﬁde
C4H10O2S
122.186
-10.2
282
1.179325
28.61
160
298
Boron tribromide
BBr3
250.523
-45
91
2.6
0
Boron trichloride
BCl3
117.169
-107
12.65
0
0.911
Bromine
Br2
159.808
-7.2
58.8
3.1028
0.944
3.1484
0
0.474
0.1
Bromobenzene
C6H5Br
157.008
-30.72
156.06
1.495020
1.074
5.45
1.70
0.983
0.556
51
565
1-Bromobutane
C4H9Br
137.018
-112.6
101.6
1.275820
0.606
7.315
2.08
0.798
5.26
18
2.6-6.6%
265
2-Bromobutane, (±)-
C4H9Br
137.018
-112.65
91.3
1.258520
8.64
2.23
9.32
21
Bromochloromethane
CH2BrCl
129.384
-87.9
68.0
1.934420
1.7
0.41
19.5
200
Bromodichloromethane
CHBrCl2
163.829
-57
90
1.98020
Bromoethane
C2H5Br
108.965
-118.6
38.5
1.460420
0.374
9.01
2.03
0.925
62.5
7-8%
511
5
Bromoethene
C2H3Br
106.949
-139.54
15.8
1.493320
5.63
1.42
1.007
141
9-15%
530
0.5
2-Bromo-2-methylpropane
C4H9Br
137.018
-16.2
73.3
1.427820
10.98
2.17
1.102
17.7
1-Bromopentane
C5H11Br
151.045
-88.0
129.8
1.218220
6.31
2.20
0.875
1.68
32
1-Bromopropane
C3H7Br
122.992
-110.3
71.1
1.353720
0.489
8.09
2.18
0.702
18.6
490
2-Bromopropane
C3H7Br
122.992
-89.0
59.5
1.314020
0.458
9.46
2.21
1.075
28.9
3-Bromopropene
C3H5Br
120.976
-119
70.1
1.39820
0.471
7.0
≈1.9
18.6
-1
4.4-7.3%
295
2-Bromotoluene
C7H7Br
171.035
-27.8
181.7
1.423220
4.641
79
Bromotrichloromethane
CBrCl3
198.274
-5.65
105
2.01225
2.405
5.35
Butanal
C4H8O
72.106
-96.86
74.8
0.801620
13.45
2.72
2.270
15.7
-22
2-12.5%
218
1,3-Butanediol
C4H10O2
90.121
-77
207.5
1.005320
28.8
2.521
0.008
121
395
1,4-Butanediol
C4H10O2
90.121
20.4
235
1.017120
31.9
2.58
2.220
121
2,3-Butanediol
C4H10O2
90.121
7.6
182.5
1.003320
2.363
402
2,3-Butanedione
C4H6O2
86.090
-1.2
88
0.980818
4.04
7.45
27
Butanenitrile
C4H7N
69.106
-111.9
117.6
0.793620
0.553
24.83
3.9
2.301
2.55
24
>1.6%
501
1-Butanethiol
C4H10S
90.187
-115.7
98.5
0.841620
5.204
1.53
1.898
6.07
2
0.5
2-Butanethiol
C4H10S
90.187
-165
85.0
0.829520
5.645
10.8
-23
Butanoic acid
C4H8O2
88.106
-5.1
163.75
0.952825
1.426
2.98
1.65
2.027
0.221
72
2-10%
443
Butanoic anhydride
C8H14O3
158.195
-75
200
0.966820
12.8
1.793
54
0.9-5.8%
279
1-Butanol
C4H10O
74.121
-88.6
117.73
0.809520
2.54
17.84
1.66
2.391
0.86
37
1-11%
343
50
2-Butanol
C4H10O
74.121
-88.5
99.51
0.806320
3.10
17.26
1.8
2.656
2.32
24
2-10%
405
100
2-Butanone
C4H8O
72.106
-86.64
79.59
0.799925
0.405
18.56
2.78
2.201
12.6
-9
1-11%
404
200
trans-2-Butenal
C4H6O
70.090
-76
102.2
0.851620
3.67
1.361
4.92
13
2.1-15.5%
232
cis-2-Butenoic acid
C4H6O2
86.090
15
169
1.026720
2-Butoxyethanol
C6H14O2
118.174
-74.8
168.4
0.901520
9.30
2.1
2.378
0.15
69
4-13%
238
20
Butyl acetate
C6H12O2
116.158
-78
126.1
0.882520
0.685
5.07
1.9
1.961
1.66
22
2-8%
425
150
sec-Butyl acetate
C6H12O2
116.158
-98.9
112
0.874820
5.135
1.87
31
1.7-9.8%
200
Butyl acrylate
C7H12O2
128.169
-64.6
145
0.889820
5.25
1.958
0.731
29
1.7-9.9%
292
2
Butylamine
C4H11N
73.137
-49.1
77.00
0.741420
0.574
4.71
1.0
2.450
12.2
-12
2-10%
312
5
sec-Butylamine
C4H11N
73.137
<-72
62.73
0.724620
1.28
-9
tert-Butylamine
C4H11N
73.137
-66.94
44.04
0.695820
58.5
1.3
2.627
48.4
-9
2-9%
380
Butylbenzene
C10H14
134.218
-87.85
183.31
0.860120
0.950
2.359
≈ 0
1.813
0.150
71
0.8-5.8%
410
tert-Butylbenzene
C10H14
134.218
-57.8
169.1
0.866520
2.359
≈0.83
1.773
0.280
60
0.7-5.7%
450
Butyl benzoate
C11H14O2
178.228
-22.4
250.3
1.00020
5.52
107
tert-Butyl ethyl ether
C6H14O
102.174
-94
72.6
0.73625
2.13
16.5
5
tert-Butyl hydroperoxide
C4H10O2
90.121
6
89 dec
0.896020
27
1-tert-Butyl-4-methylbenzene
C11H16
148.245
-52
190
0.861220
≈0
0.09
68
1
Butyl vinyl ether
C6H12O
100.158
-92
94
0.788820
1.25
2.316
6.65
-9
255
-Butyrolactone
C4H6O2
86.090
-43.61
204
1.129620
39.0
4.27
1.642
0.43
98
Carbon disulﬁde
CS2
76.141
-112.1
46
1.263220
0.352
2.6320
0
1.003
48.2
-30
1-50%
90
10
Chloroacetaldehyde
C2H3ClO
78.497
-16.3
85.5
1.19
Chloroacetone
C3H5ClO
92.524
-44.5
119
1.1520
Chloroacetyl chloride
C2H2Cl2O
112.942
-22
106
1.420220
2.23
3.33
0.05
2-Chloroaniline
C6H6ClN
127.572
-1.9
208.8
3.32
13.40
1.77
0.034
3-Chloroaniline
C6H6ClN
127.572
-10.28
230.5
1.216120
13.3
1.558
705
Chlorobenzene
C6H5Cl
112.557
-45.31
131.72
1.105820
0.753
5.6895
1.69
1.334
1.6
28
1-10%
593
10
2-Chloro-1,3-butadiene
C4H5Cl
88.536
-130
59.4
0.95620
4.914
29.5
-20
4-20%
10
Name
Mol. 
Form.
Mr
tm/°C
tb/°C
/
g mL–1
/
mPa s

/D
cp/
J g–1K–1
vp/
kPa
FP/
°C
Fl. Lim.
IT/
°C
TLV/
ppm


--- PAGE 2425 ---
TeamLRN
15-18
LABORATORY SOLVENTS AND OTHER LIQUID REAGENTS (continued)
1-Chlorobutane
C4H9Cl
92.567
-123.1
78.4
0.885720
0.422
7.276
2.05
1.891
13.7
-12
2-10%
240
2-Chlorobutane
C4H9Cl
92.567
-131.3
68.2
0.873220
8.564
2.04
21.0
-10
Chlorocyclohexane
C6H11Cl
118.604
-43.81
142
1.00020
7.9505
2.1
32
Chlorodibromomethane
CHBr2Cl
208.280
-20
120
2.45120
Chloroethane
C2H5Cl
64.514
-138.4
12.3
0.92390
9.45
2.05
1.617
160
-50
4-15%
519
100
2-Chloroethanol
C2H5ClO
80.513
-67.5
128.6
1.201920
25.80
1.78
60
5-16%
425
2-Chloroethyl vinyl ether
C4H7ClO
106.551
-70
108
1.049520
27
(Chloromethyl)benzene
C7H7Cl
126.584
-45
179
1.100420
6.854
1.8
1.44
0.164
67
1%-
585
1
Chloromethyl methyl ether
C2H5ClO
80.513
-103.5
59.5
1.06310
24.9
1-Chloro-2-methylpropane
C4H9Cl
92.567
-130.3
68.5
0.877320
7.027
2.00
1.713
19.9
-6
2-8.7%
2-Chloro-2-methylpropane
C4H9Cl
92.567
-25.60
50.9
0.842020
9.663
2.13
1.867
42.7
0
1-Chloronaphthalene
C10H7Cl
162.616
-2.5
259
1.188025
5.04
1.57
1.307
121
>558
1-Chlorooctane
C8H17Cl
148.674
-57.8
183.5
0.873420
5.05
2.00
1.335
70
1-Chloropentane
C5H11Cl
106.594
-99.0
108.4
0.882020
6.654
2.16
4.36
13
1.6-8.6%
260
2-Chlorophenol
C6H5ClO
128.556
9.4
174.9
1.263420
3.59
7.40
1.468
0.308
64
1-Chloropropane
C3H7Cl
78.541
-122.9
46.5
0.889920
0.334
8.588
2.05
1.683
45.8
<-18
2.6-11%
520
2-Chloropropane
C3H7Cl
78.541
-117.18
35.7
0.861720
0.303
2.17
68.9
-32
2.8-11%
593
3-Chloro-1,2-propanediol
C3H7ClO2
110.540
213 dec
1.32518
31.0
3-Chloropropanenitrile
C3H4ClN
89.524
-51
175.5
1.157320
76
2-Chloropropene
C3H5Cl
76.525
-137.4
22.6
0.901720
8.92
1.647
110
-37
4.5-16%
3-Chloropropene
C3H5Cl
76.525
-134.5
45.1
0.937620
0.314
8.2
1.94
1.635
48.9
-32
2.9-11%
485
1
Chlorosulfonic acid
ClHO3S
116.525
-80
152
1.75
2-Chlorotoluene
C7H7Cl
126.584
-35.8
159.0
1.082520
0.964
4.721
1.56
1.318
0.482
50
4-Chlorotoluene
C7H7Cl
126.584
7.5
162.4
1.069720
0.837
6.25
2.21
Chromyl chloride
Cl2CrO2
154.900
-96.5
117
1.91
0.025
trans-Cinnamaldehyde
C9H8O
132.159
-7.5
246
1.049720
17.72
o-Cresol
C7H8O
108.138
31.03
191.04
1.032735
6.76
1.45
2.160
0.041
81
>1.4%
599
5
m-Cresol
C7H8O
108.138
12.24
202.27
1.033920
12.91
12.44
1.48
2.080
0.019
86
>1.1%
558
5
p-Cresol
C7H8O
108.138
34.77
201.98
1.018540
13.05
1.48
2.044
0.017
86
>1.1%
558
5
Cyanogen chloride
CClN
61.471
-6.5
13
1.18620
2.8331
Cyclobutane
C4H8
56.107
-90.7
12.6
0.70380
0
157
<10
>1.8%
Cyclohexane
C6H12
84.159
6.59
80.73
0.773925
0.894
2.0243
≈0
1.841
13.0
-20
1-8%
245
300
Cyclohexanol
C6H12O
100.158
25.93
160.84
0.962420
57.5
16.40
2.079
0.10
68
1-9%
300
50
Cyclohexanone
C6H10O
98.142
-27.9
155.43
0.947820
2.02
16.1
2.87
1.856
0.53
44
1-9%
420
25
Cyclohexene
C6H10
82.143
-103.5
82.98
0.811020
0.625
2.2176
0.33
1.805
11.8
-12
>1.2%
310
300
Cyclohexylamine
C6H13N
99.174
-17.8
134
0.819120
1.944
4.547
1.3
1.20
31
1-9%
293
10
1,3-Cyclopentadiene
C5H6
66.102
-85
41
0.802120
0.419
58.5
75
Cyclopentane
C5H10
70.133
-93.4
49.3
0.745720
0.413
1.9687
≈0
1.837
42.3
-25
2%-
361
600
Cyclopentanol
C5H10O
86.132
-17.5
140.42
0.948820
18.5
2.119
0.294
51
Cyclopentanone
C5H8O
84.117
-51.90
130.57
0.948720
13.58
3.3
1.84
1.55
26
cis-Decahydronaphthalene
C10H18
138.250
-42.9
195.8
0.896520
3.04
2.219
≈0
1.678
0.10
trans-Decahydronaphthalene
C10H18
138.250
-30.4
187.3
0.865925
1.948
2.184
≈0
1.653
0.164
54
1-5%
255
Decamethylcyclopentasiloxane
C10H30O5Si5
370.770
-38
210
0.959320
2.50
Decanal
C10H20O
156.265
-4.0
208.5
0.83015
Decane
C10H22
142.282
-29.6
174.15
0.726625
0.838
1.9853
≈ 0
2.210
0.170
51
0.8-5.4%
210
Decanoic acid
C10H20O2
172.265
31.4
268.7
0.885840
2.761
1-Decanol
C10H22O
158.281
6.9
231.1
0.829720
10.91
7.93
2.341
0.009
82
288
1-Decene
C10H20
140.266
-66.3
170.5
0.740820
0.756
2.136
≈ 0
2.144
0.210
<55
235
Diacetone alcohol
C6H12O2
116.158
-44
167.9
0.938720
2.80
18.2
3.2
1.905
0.224
58
2-7%
643
50
Dibenzyl ether
C14H14O
198.260
1.8
298
1.042820
3.821
135
Dibromodiﬂuoromethane
CBr2F2
209.816
-110.1
22.76
0.66
110
100
1,2-Dibromoethane
C2H4Br2
187.861
9.84
131.6
2.168325
1.595
4.9612
1.2
0.724
1.55
Dibromomethane
CH2Br2
173.835
-52.5
97
2.496920
0.980
7.77
1.43
0.61
6.12
1,2-Dibromotetraﬂuoroethane
C2Br2F4
259.823
-110.32
47.35
2.14925
2.34
0.69
43.4
Dibutylamine
C8H19N
129.244
-62
159.6
0.767020
0.918
2.765
1.0
2.266
0.34
47
1-6%
Dibutyl ether
C8H18O
130.228
-95.2
140.28
0.768420
0.637
3.0830
1.17
2.136
0.898
25
1.5-7.6%
194
Di-tert-butyl peroxide
C8H18O2
146.228
-40
111
0.70420
3.43
18
Dibutyl phthalate
C16H22O4
278.344
-35
340
1.046520
16.63
6.58
2.82
1.789
157
>0.5%
402
Dibutyl sebacate
C18H34O4
314.461
-10
344.5
0.940515
4.54
2.48
1.968
178
>0.4%
365
Dibutyl sulﬁde
C8H18S
146.294
-79.7
185
0.838620
4.29
1.61
1.943
76
Dichloroacetic acid
C2H2Cl2O2
128.942
10
194
1.563420
8.33
o-Dichlorobenzene
C6H4Cl2
147.002
-17.0
180
1.305920
1.324
10.12
2.50
1.105
0.18
66
2-9%
648
25
m-Dichlorobenzene
C6H4Cl2
147.002
-24.8
173
1.288420
1.044
5.02
1.72
1.163
0.252
72
trans-1,4-Dichloro-2-butene
C4H6Cl2
124.997
1.0
155.4
1.18325
0.005
Dichlorodimethylsilane
C2H6Cl2Si
129.061
-16
70.3
1.06425
18.9
<21
3.4-9.5%
1,1-Dichloroethane
C2H4Cl2
98.959
-96.9
57.3
1.175720
0.464
10.10
2.06
1.276
30.5
-17
5-11%
458
100
Name
Mol. 
Form.
Mr
tm/°C
tb/°C
/
g mL–1
/
mPa s

/D
cp/
J g–1K–1
vp/
kPa
FP/
°C
Fl. Lim.
IT/
°C
TLV/
ppm


--- PAGE 2426 ---
15-19
LABORATORY SOLVENTS AND OTHER LIQUID REAGENTS (continued)
1,2-Dichloroethane
C2H4Cl2
98.959
-35.7
83.5
1.245425
0.779
10.42
1.8
1.298
10.6
13
6-16%
413
10
1,1-Dichloroethene
C2H2Cl2
96.943
-122.56
31.6
1.21320
4.60
1.34
1.148
80.0
-28
7-16%
570
5
cis-1,2-Dichloroethene
C2H2Cl2
96.943
-80.0
60.1
1.283720
0.445
9.20
1.90
1.201
26.8
6
3-15%
460
200
trans-1,2-Dichloroethene
C2H2Cl2
96.943
-49.8
48.7
1.256520
0.317
2.14
0
1.205
44.2
2
6-13%
460
200
Dichloromethane
CH2Cl2
84.933
-97.2
40
1.326620
0.413
8.93
1.60
1.192
58.2
13-23%
556
50
(Dichloromethyl)benzene
C7H6Cl2
161.029
-17
205
1.2625
6.9
2.1
0.06
1,1-Dichloropropane
C3H6Cl2
112.986
88.1
1.132120
9.09
1,2-Dichloropropane, (±)-
C3H6Cl2
112.986
-100.53
96.4
1.156020
8.37
1.8
1.320
6.62
21
3-15%
557
75
1,3-Dichloropropane
C3H6Cl2
112.986
-99.5
120.9
1.178525
10.27
2.08
2,3-Dichloropropene
C3H4Cl2
110.970
10
94
1.21120
15
2.6-7.8%
2,4-Dichlorotoluene
C7H6Cl2
161.029
-13.5
201
1.247620
5.68
1.70
0.055
Dicyclohexylamine
C12H23N
181.318
-0.1
256 dec
0.912320
>99
Diethanolamine
C4H11NO2
105.136
28
268.8
1.096620
25.75
2.8
2.22
<0.01
172
2-13%
662
0.46
1,1-Diethoxyethane
C6H14O2
118.174
-100
102.25
0.825420
3.80
1.4
2.01
3.68
-21
2-10%
230
1,2-Diethoxyethane
C6H14O2
118.174
-74.0
121.2
0.835125
3.90
2.195
4.33
27
205
Diethylamine
C4H11N
73.137
-49.8
55.5
0.705620
0.319
3.680
0.92
2.313
30.1
-23
2-10%
312
5
N,N-Diethylaniline
C10H15N
149.233
-38.8
216.3
0.930720
5.15
85
630
o-Diethylbenzene
C10H14
134.218
-31.2
184
0.880020
2.594
57
395
m-Diethylbenzene
C10H14
134.218
-83.9
181.1
0.860220
2.369
56
450
p-Diethylbenzene
C10H14
134.218
-42.83
183.7
0.862020
2.259
55
0.7-6%
430
Diethyl carbonate
C5H10O3
118.131
-43
126
0.969225
2.820
1.10
1.80
1.63
25
Diethylene glycol
C4H10O3
106.120
-10.4
245.8
1.119715
30.2
31.82
2.3
2.307
0.001
124
2-17%
224
Diethylene glycol diethyl ether
C8H18O3
162.227
-45
188
0.906320
5.70
2.104
82
Diethylene glycol dimethyl ether
C6H14O3
134.173
-68
162
0.943420
0.989
7.23
2.0
2.043
0.315
67
Diethylene glycol monobutyl ether
C8H18O3
162.227
-68
231
0.955320
2.188
Diethylene glycol monoethyl ether
C6H14O3
134.173
196
0.988520
1.6
2.243
0.017
96
Diethylene glycol monoethyl ether 
acetate
C8H16O4
176.211
-25
218.5
1.009620
1.8
0.029
110
425
Diethylene glycol monomethyl 
ether
C5H12O3
120.147
193
1.03520
1.6
2.256
0.024
96
1-23%
240
Diethyl ether
C4H10O
74.121
-116.2
34.5
0.713820
0.224
4.2666
1.15
2.369
71.7
-45
2-36%
180
400
Diethyl maleate
C8H12O4
172.179
-8.8
223
1.066220
7.560
121
350
Diethyl malonate
C7H12O4
160.168
-50
200
1.055120
7.550
2.54
1.779
93
Diethyl oxalate
C6H10O4
146.141
-40.6
185.7
1.078520
8.266
2.49
1.784
0.030
76
Diethyl phthalate
C12H14O4
222.237
-40.5
295
1.23214
7.86
1.647
161
>0.7%
457
Diethyl succinate
C8H14O4
174.195
-21
217.7
1.040220
6.098
90
Diethyl sulfate
C4H10O4S
154.185
-24
208
1.17225
29.2
104
436
Diethyl sulﬁde
C4H10S
90.187
-103.91
92.1
0.836220
0.422
5.723
1.54
1.900
7.78
Diiodomethane
CH2I2
267.836
6.1
182
3.321120
5.32
1.08
0.500
0.172
Diiodosilane
H2I2Si
283.911
-1
150
Diisobutylamine
C8H19N
129.244
-73.5
139.6
0.723
0.972
29
Diisopentyl ether
C10H22O
158.281
172.5
0.777720
2.817
1.23
2.394
0.210
Diisopropylamine
C6H15N
101.190
-61
83.9
0.715320
0.393
1.15
10.7
-1
1.1-7.1%
316
5
Diisopropyl ether
C6H14O
102.174
-85.4
68.4
0.719225
0.379
3.805
1.13
2.122
19.9
-28
1-8%
443
250
1,2-Dimethoxyethane
C4H10O2
90.121
-69.20
84.5
0.863725
0.455
7.30
2.145
9.93
-2
202
Dimethoxymethane
C3H8O2
76.095
-105.1
42
0.859320
2.644
0.7
2.129
53.1
-32
2-14%
237
1000
Dimethylacetal
C4H10O2
90.121
-113.2
64.5
0.850120
22.9
N,N-Dimethylacetamide
C4H9NO
87.120
-18.59
165
0.937225
0.927
38.85
3.7
2.016
0.075
70
2-12%
490
10
2,3-Dimethylaniline
C8H11N
121.180
<-15
221.5
0.993120
97
>1%
0.5
2,6-Dimethylaniline
C8H11N
121.180
11.2
215
0.984220
1.63
1.971
96
0.5
N,N-Dimethylaniline
C8H11N
121.180
2.42
194.15
0.955720
1.300
4.90
1.68
1.771
63
371
5
2,2-Dimethylbutane
C6H14
86.175
-98.8
49.73
0.644425
0.351
1.869
≈ 0
2.227
42.5
-48
1.2-7%
405
500
2,3-Dimethylbutane
C6H14
86.175
-128.10
57.93
0.661620
0.361
1.889
≈ 0
2.201
31.3
-29
1.2-7%
405
500
3,3-Dimethyl-2-butanone
C6H12O
100.158
-52.5
106.1
0.722925
12.73
4.27
Dimethylcarbamic chloride
C3H6ClNO
107.539
-33
167
1.16825
Dimethyl disulﬁde
C2H6S2
94.199
-84.67
109.74
1.062520
9.6
1.8
1.551
3.82
24
N,N-Dimethylethanolamine
C4H11NO
89.136
-59
134
0.886620
N,N-Dimethylformamide
C3H7NO
73.094
-60.48
153
0.944525
0.794
38.25
3.82
2.060
0.439
58
2-15%
445
10
2,6-Dimethyl-4-heptanone
C9H18O
142.238
-41.5
169.4
0.806220
9.91
2.7
2.090
0.23
49
1-7%
396
25
1,1-Dimethylhydrazine
C2H8N2
60.098
-57.20
63.9
0.79122
2.731
-15
2-95%
249
0.01
Dimethyl phthalate
C10H10O4
194.184
5.5
283.7
1.190520
14.36
8.66
1.561
146
>0.9%
490
2,6-Dimethylpyridine
C7H9N
107.153
-6.1
144.01
0.922620
7.33
1.7
1.728
0.746
Dimethyl sulfate
C2H6O4S
126.132
-31.7
188 dec
1.332220
55.0
83
188
0.1
Dimethyl sulﬁde
C2H6S
62.134
-98.24
37.33
0.848320
0.284
6.70
1.554
1.901
64.4
-37
2.2-20%
206
Dimethyl sulfoxide
C2H6OS
78.133
17.89
189
1.101025
1.987
47.24
3.96
1.958
0.084
95
3-42%
215
1,4-Dioxane
C4H8O2
88.106
11.85
101.5
1.033720
1.177
2.2189
0
1.726
4.95
12
2-22%
180
20
Name
Mol. 
Form.
Mr
tm/°C
tb/°C
/
g mL–1
/
mPa s

/D
cp/
J g–1K–1
vp/
kPa
FP/
°C
Fl. Lim.
IT/
°C
TLV/
ppm


--- PAGE 2427 ---
TeamLRN
15-20
LABORATORY SOLVENTS AND OTHER LIQUID REAGENTS (continued)
1,3-Dioxolane
C3H6O2
74.079
-97.22
78
1.06020
1.19
1.593
14.6
2
Dipentyl ether
C10H22O
158.281
-69
190
0.783320
2.798
1.20
1.579
57
170
Dipropylamine
C6H15N
101.190
-63
109.3
0.740020
0.517
2.923
1.03
2.500
3.21
17
299
Dipropylene glycol monomethyl 
ether
C7H16O3
148.200
-80
188.3
0.95
100
Dipropyl ether
C6H14O
102.174
-114.8
90.08
0.746620
0.396
3.38
1.21
2.169
8.35
21
1.3-7%
188
Dodecane
C12H26
170.334
-9.57
216.32
0.749520
1.383
2.0120
≈ 0
2.206
0.016
74
>0.6%
203
1-Dodecanol
C12H26O
186.333
23.9
260
0.830924
5.82
2.351
127
275
1-Dodecene
C12H24
168.319
-35.2
213.8
0.758420
1.20
2.152
≈ 0
2.143
0.019
79
Epichlorohydrin
C3H5ClO
92.524
-26
118
1.181220
1.073
22.6
1.8
1.422
2.2
31
4-21%
411
0.5
1,2-Epoxybutane
C4H8O
72.106
-150
63.4
0.829720
1.891
2.039
31.7
-22
1.7-19%
439
1,2-Epoxy-4-
(epoxyethyl)cyclohexane
C8H12O2
140.180
<-55
227
1.096620
0.1
1,2-Ethanediamine
C2H8N2
60.098
11.14
117
0.897920
13.82
1.99
2.872
1.62
40
3-12%
385
10
1,2-Ethanediol
C2H6O2
62.068
-12.69
197.3
1.113520
16.06
41.4
2.28
2.394
0.01
111
3-22%
398
35
1,2-Ethanediol, diacetate
C6H10O4
146.141
-31
190
1.104320
7.7
2.34
2.121
0.030
88
1.6-8.4%
482
1,2-Ethanediol, dinitrate
C2H4N2O6
152.062
-22.3
198.5
1.491820
28.26
0.009
0.05
1,2-Ethanedithiol
C2H6S2
94.199
-41.2
146.1
1.23420
7.26
2.03
Ethanethiol
C2H6S
62.134
-147.88
35.0
0.831525
0.287
6.667
1.60
1.898
70.3
-17
2.8-18%
300
0.5
Ethanol
C2H6O
46.068
-114.14
78.29
0.789320
1.074
25.3
1.69
2.438
7.87
13
3-19%
363
1000
Ethanolamine
C2H7NO
61.083
10.5
171
1.018020
21.1
31.94
2.3
3.201
0.05
86
3-24%
410
3
4-Ethoxyaniline
C8H11NO
137.179
4.6
254
1.065216
7.43
116
Ethoxybenzene
C8H10O
122.164
-29.43
169.81
0.965120
1.197
4.216
1.45
1.870
0.204
63
2-Ethoxyethanol
C4H10O2
90.121
-70
135
0.925325
13.38
2.1
2.339
0.71
43
3-18%
235
5
2-Ethoxyethyl acetate
C6H12O3
132.157
-61.7
156.4
0.974020
7.567
2.2
2.845
0.24
56
2-8%
379
5
Ethyl acetate
C4H8O2
88.106
-83.8
77.11
0.900320
0.423
6.0814
1.78
1.937
12.6
-4
2-12%
426
400
Ethyl acetoacetate
C6H10O3
130.141
-45
180.8
1.036810
14.0
1.906
0.095
57
1-10%
295
Ethyl acrylate
C5H8O2
100.117
-71.2
99.4
0.923420
6.05
1.96
5.14
10
1.4-14%
372
5
Ethylamine
C2H7N
45.084
-80.5
16.5
0.68915
8.7
1.22
2.884
141
-16
4-14%
385
5
N-Ethylaniline
C8H11N
121.180
-63.5
203.0
0.962520
2.05
5.87
85
Ethylbenzene
C8H10
106.165
-94.96
136.19
0.862625
0.631
2.4463
0.59
1.726
1.28
21
1-7%
432
100
Ethyl benzoate
C9H10O2
150.174
-34
212
1.041525
6.20
2.00
1.638
88
490
Ethyl butanoate
C6H12O2
116.158
-98
121.3
0.873525
0.639
5.18
1.74
1.963
2.01
24
463
2-Ethyl-1-butanol
C6H14O
102.174
<-15
147
0.832620
6.19
0.206
57
Ethyl chloroacetate
C4H7ClO2
122.551
-21
144.3
1.158520
0.640
64
Ethyl chloroformate
C3H5ClO2
108.524
-80.6
95
1.135220
9.736
16
500
Ethyl cyanoacetate
C5H7NO2
113.116
-22.5
205
1.065420
31.62
2.17
1.947
110
Ethyleneimine
C2H5N
43.068
-77.9
56
0.83225
18.3
1.90
28.9
-11
3.3-55%
320
0.5
Ethyl formate
C3H6O2
74.079
-79.6
54.4
0.920820
0.380
8.57
1.9
2.015
32.3
-20
3-16%
455
100
2-Ethylhexanal
C8H16O
128.212
<-100
163
0.854020
44
0.9-7.2%
190
2-Ethyl-1,3-hexanediol
C8H18O2
146.228
-40
244
0.932522
18.73
127
360
2-Ethyl-1-hexanol
C8H18O
130.228
-70
184.6
0.831925
6.27
7.58
1.74
2.438
0.019
73
0.8-9.7%
231
2-Ethylhexyl acetate
C10H20O2
172.265
-80
199
0.871820
1.8
71
1-8%
268
Ethyl lactate
C5H10O3
118.131
-26
154.5
1.032820
15.4
2.4
2.150
46
>1.5%
400
Ethyl 3-methylbutanoate
C7H14O2
130.185
-99.3
135.0
0.865620
4.71
1.07
Ethyl 2-methylpropanoate
C6H12O2
116.158
-88.2
110.1
0.86820
3.25
13
Ethyl nitrite
C2H5NO2
75.067
18
0.89915
-35
4-50%
90
Ethyl propanoate
C5H10O2
102.132
-73.9
99.1
0.884325
0.501
5.76
1.74
1.920
4.97
12
1.9-11%
440
Ethyl silicate
C8H20O4Si
208.329
-82.5
168.8
0.932020
2.50
1.749
1.17
52
10
Eucalyptol
C10H18O
154.249
0.8
176.4
0.926720
4.57
0.260
48
Fluorobenzene
C6H5F
96.102
-42.18
84.73
1.022520
0.550
5.465
1.60
1.523
10.4
-15
Fluorosulfonic acid
FHO3S
100.070
-89
163
1.726
Formamide
CH3NO
45.041
2.49
220
1.133420
3.34
111.0
3.73
2.389
154
10
Formic acid
CH2O2
46.026
8.3
101
1.22020
1.607
51.1
1.425
2.151
5.75
50
18-57%
434
5
Furan
C4H4O
68.074
-85.61
31.5
0.951420
0.361
2.94
0.66
1.686
80.0
-36
2-14%
Furfural
C5H4O2
96.085
-38.1
161.7
1.159420
1.587
42.1
3.5
1.698
0.29
60
2-19%
316
2
Furfuryl alcohol
C5H6O2
98.101
-14.6
171
1.129620
16.85
1.9
2.079
0.097
75
2-16%
491
10
Germanium(IV) chloride
Cl4Ge
214.42
-51.50
86.55
1.88
0
Glycerol
C3H8O3
92.094
18.1
290
1.261320
934
46.53
2.6
2.377
<0.01
199
3-19%
370
Glycerol triacetate
C9H14O6
218.203
-78
259
1.158320
7.11
1.763
<0.01
138
1%-
433
Glycerol trioleate
C57H104O6
885.432
-4
0.91515
3.109
Heptanal
C7H14O
114.185
-43.4
152.8
0.813225
9.07
2.015
Heptane
C7H16
100.202
-90.55
98.4
0.679525
0.387
1.9209
≈0
2.242
6.09
-4
1-7%
204
400
Heptanoic acid
C7H14O2
130.185
-7.17
222.2
0.912425
3.84
3.04
2.039
275
1-Heptanol
C7H16O
116.201
-33.2
176.45
0.821920
5.81
11.75
2.342
2-Heptanone
C7H14O
114.185
-35
151.05
0.811120
0.714
11.95
2.6
2.037
0.49
39
1-8%
393
50
Name
Mol. 
Form.
Mr
tm/°C
tb/°C
/
g mL–1
/
mPa s

/D
cp/
J g–1K–1
vp/
kPa
FP/
°C
Fl. Lim.
IT/
°C
TLV/
ppm


--- PAGE 2428 ---
15-21
LABORATORY SOLVENTS AND OTHER LIQUID REAGENTS (continued)
3-Heptanone
C7H14O
114.185
-39
147
0.818320
12.7
2.78
46
50
4-Heptanone
C7H14O
114.185
-33
144
0.817420
12.60
0.164
49
50
1-Heptene
C7H14
98.186
-118.9
93.64
0.697020
0.340
2.092
≈ 0
2.157
7.52
-1
260
Hexachloro-1,3-butadiene
C4Cl6
260.761
-21
215
1.55625
2.55
610
0.02
Hexachloro-1,3-cyclopentadiene
C5Cl6
272.772
-9
239
1.701925
0.01
Hexaﬂuorobenzene
C6F6
186.054
5.03
80.26
1.618420
2.79
2.029
0
1.191
11.3
Hexamethyldisiloxane
C6H18OSi2
162.377
-66
99
0.763820
2.179
1.918
Hexamethylphosphoric triamide
C6H18N3OP
179.200
7.2
232.5
1.0320
31.3
5.5
1.791
Hexanal
C6H12O
100.158
-56
131
0.833520
2.101
1.48
32
Hexane
C6H14
86.175
-95.35
68.73
0.660625
0.300
1.8865
≈0
2.270
20.2
-22
1-8%
225
50
Hexanedinitrile
C6H8N2
108.141
1
295
0.967620
1.190
<0.01
93
2-5%
550
2
Hexanoic acid
C6H12O2
116.158
-3
205.2
0.921225
2.600
1.13
1.937
0.005
102
380
1-Hexanol
C6H14O
102.174
-47.4
157.6
0.813620
4.58
13.03
2.353
0.11
63
290
2-Hexanone
C6H12O
100.158
-55.5
127.6
0.811320
0.583
14.56
2.7
2.130
1.54
25
1-8%
423
5
1-Hexene
C6H12
84.159
-139.76
63.48
0.668525
0.252
2.077
≈ 0
2.178
24.8
-26
1.2-6.9%
253
30
Hexyl acetate
C8H16O2
144.212
-80.9
171.5
0.877915
4.42
1.961
0.185
45
Hydrazine
H4N2
32.045
1.4
113.55
1.0036
0.876
51.7
1.75
3.086
38
5-100%
0.01
Hydrazoic acid
HN3
43.028
-80
35.7
1.70
Hydrogen cyanide
CHN
27.026
-13.29
26
0.687620
0.183
114.9
2.985
2.612
98.8
-18
6-40%
538
Hydrogen peroxide
H2O2
34.015
-0.43
150.2
1.44
74.6
1.573
2.619
1
3-Hydroxypropanenitrile
C3H5NO
71.078
-46
221
1.040425
3.2
0.010
129
Indan
C9H10
118.175
-51.38
177.97
0.963920
1.357
1.609
Indene
C9H8
116.160
-1.5
182
0.996025
1.609
0.220
10
Iodine bromide
BrI
206.808
40
116 dec
4.3
0.726
Iodine chloride
ClI
162.357
27.39
100 dec
3.24
1.24
Iodobenzene
C6H5I
204.008
-31.3
188.4
1.830820
1.554
4.59
1.70
0.778
0.133
1-Iodobutane
C4H9I
184.018
-103
130.5
1.615420
6.27
1.93
1.85
Iodoethane
C2H5I
155.965
-111.1
72.3
1.935720
0.556
7.82
1.976
0.738
18.2
Iodomethane
CH3I
141.939
-66.4
42.43
2.278920
0.469
6.97
1.62
0.888
53.9
2
1-Iodopropane
C3H7I
169.992
-101.3
102.5
1.748920
0.703
7.07
2.04
0.746
5.75
2-Iodopropane
C3H7I
169.992
-90
89.5
1.704220
0.653
8.19
1.95
0.535
9.36
Iron pentacarbonyl
C5FeO5
195.896
-20
103
1.520
2.602
1.228
0.1
Isobutanal
C4H8O
72.106
-65.9
64.5
0.789120
2.75
23.0
-18
1.6-10.6%
196
Isobutyl acetate
C6H12O2
116.158
-98.8
116.5
0.871220
0.676
5.068
1.9
2.013
2.39
18
1-11%
421
150
Isobutyl acrylate
C7H12O2
128.169
-61
132
0.889620
30
427
Isobutylamine
C4H11N
73.137
-86.7
67.75
0.72425
0.571
4.43
1.3
2.505
19.0
-9
2-12%
378
Isobutylbenzene
C10H14
134.218
-51.4
172.79
0.853220
2.318
≈ 0
1.793
0.257
55
0.8-6%
427
Isobutyl formate
C5H10O2
102.132
-95.8
98.2
0.877620
6.41
1.88
5.34
5
2-9%
320
Isobutyl isobutanoate
C8H16O2
144.212
-80.7
148.6
0.854220
1.9
0.552
38
1-8%
432
Isopentane
C5H12
72.149
-159.77
27.88
0.620120
0.214
1.845
0.13
2.284
91.7
-51
1.4-7.6%
420
600
Isopentyl acetate
C7H14O2
130.185
-78.5
142.5
0.87615
4.72
1.9
1.909
0.728
25
1-8%
360
50
Isophorone
C9H14O
138.206
-8.1
215.2
0.925520
2.33
1.834
0.06
84
1-4%
460
5
Isopropenyl acetate
C5H8O2
100.117
-92.9
94
0.909020
6.02
26
432
Isopropenylbenzene
C9H10
118.175
-23.2
165.4
0.910620
2.28
1.711
54
1.9-6.1%
574
50
Isopropyl acetate
C5H10O2
102.132
-73.4
88.6
0.871820
1.952
7.88
2
2-8%
460
250
Isopropylamine
C3H9N
59.110
-95.13
31.76
0.689120
0.325
5.6268
1.19
2.771
78.0
-37
402
5
Isopropylbenzene
C9H12
120.191
-96.02
152.41
0.864025
0.737
2.381
0.79
1.753
0.61
36
1-7%
424
50
Isopropylbenzene hydroperoxide
C9H12O2
152.190
153
1.0320
0.004
1-Isopropyl-2-methylbenzene
C10H14
134.218
-71.5
178.1
0.876620
1-Isopropyl-3-methylbenzene
C10H14
134.218
-63.7
175.1
0.861020
1-Isopropyl-4-methylbenzene
C10H14
134.218
-67.94
177.1
0.857320
2.2322
≈0
1.761
0.19
47
1-6%
436
Isoquinoline
C9H7N
129.159
26.47
243.22
1.091030
11.0
2.73
1.519
d-Limonene
C10H16
136.234
-74.0
178
0.841120
1.47
2.3746
1.828
0.277
45
0.7-6.1%
237
l-Limonene
C10H16
136.234
178
0.84320
2.3738
0.254
Mesityl oxide
C6H10O
98.142
-59
130
0.865320
0.602
15.6
2.8
2.165
1.47
31
1-7%
344
15
Methacrylic acid
C4H6O2
86.090
16
162.5
1.015320
1.65
1.871
77
1.6-8.8%
68
20
Methanol
CH4O
32.042
-97.53
64.6
0.791420
0.544
33.0
1.70
2.531
16.9
11
6-36%
464
200
2-Methoxyaniline
C7H9NO
123.152
6.2
224
1.092320
5.230
118
0.1
4-Methoxybenzaldehyde
C8H8O2
136.149
0
248
1.11915
22.0
2-Methoxyethanol
C3H8O2
76.095
-85.1
124.1
0.964720
17.2
2.36
2.249
1.31
39
2-14%
285
5
2-Methoxyethyl acetate
C5H10O3
118.131
-70
143
1.007419
8.25
2.1
2.624
0.67
49
2-12%
392
5
Methyl acetate
C3H6O2
74.079
-98.25
56.87
0.934220
0.364
7.07
1.72
1.916
28.8
-10
3-16%
454
200
Methyl acrylate
C4H6O2
86.090
<-75
80.7
0.953520
7.03
1.77
1.845
11.0
-3
2.8-25%
468
2
2-Methylacrylonitrile
C4H5N
67.090
-35.8
90.3
0.800120
3.69
1.883
8.26
1
2-6.8%
1
2-Methylaniline
C7H9N
107.153
-14.41
200.3
0.998420
3.82
6.138
1.6
1.96
0.043
85
482
2
3-Methylaniline
C7H9N
107.153
-31.3
203.3
0.988920
3.31
5.816
1.45
2.118
0.036
2
Name
Mol. 
Form.
Mr
tm/°C
tb/°C
/
g mL–1
/
mPa s

/D
cp/
J g–1K–1
vp/
kPa
FP/
°C
Fl. Lim.
IT/
°C
TLV/
ppm


--- PAGE 2429 ---
TeamLRN
15-22
LABORATORY SOLVENTS AND OTHER LIQUID REAGENTS (continued)
N-Methylaniline
C7H9N
107.153
-57
196.2
0.989120
2.04
5.96
1.933
0.5
Methyl benzoate
C8H8O2
136.149
-12.4
199
1.083725
1.857
6.642
1.9
1.625
0.052
83
2-Methyl-1,3-butadiene
C5H8
68.118
-145.9
34.0
0.67920
2.098
0.25
2.240
73.4
-54
1.5-8.9%
395
Methyl butanoate
C5H10O2
102.132
-85.8
102.8
0.898420
0.541
5.48
1.941
4.30
14
3-Methylbutanoic acid
C5H10O2
102.132
-29.3
176.5
0.93120
0.63
1.930
0.067
416
3-Methyl-1-butanol
C5H12O
88.148
-117.2
131.1
0.810420
3.69
15.63
2.382
0.315
43
1.2-9%
350
100
2-Methyl-2-butanol
C5H12O
88.148
-9.1
102.4
0.809620
3.55
5.78
1.82
2.803
2.19
19
1.2-9%
437
3-Methyl-2-butanol, (±)-
C5H12O
88.148
112.9
0.818020
12.1
1.20
38
3-Methyl-2-butanone
C5H10O
86.132
-93.1
94.33
0.805120
10.37
2.089
6.99
200
2-Methyl-1-butene
C5H10
70.133
-137.53
31.2
0.650420
2.180
2.241
81.4
-20
2-Methyl-2-butene
C5H10
70.133
-133.72
38.56
0.662320
0.203
1.979
2.179
62.1
-20
Methyl tert-butyl ether
C5H12O
88.148
-108.6
55.0
0.735325
2.127
33.6
40
Methyl chloroacetate
C3H5ClO2
108.524
-32.1
129.5
1.23620
12.0
57
7.5-18.5%
Methylcyclohexane
C7H14
98.186
-126.6
100.93
0.769420
0.679
2.024
≈0
1.882
6.18
-4
1-7%
250
400
Methylcyclopentane
C6H12
84.159
-142.42
71.8
0.748620
0.479
1.9853
≈ 0
1.886
18.3
-29
1-8%
258
N-Methylformamide
C2H5NO
59.067
-3.8
199.51
1.01119
1.678
189.0
3.83
2.096
Methyl formate
C2H4O2
60.052
-99
31.7
0.971320
0.325
9.20
1.77
1.983
78.1
-19
5-23%
449
100
5-Methyl-2-hexanone
C7H14O
114.185
144
0.88820
13.53
0.691
36
1-8%
191
50
Methylhydrazine
CH6N2
46.072
-52.36
87.5
2.928
6.61
-8
2.5-92%
194
0.01
Methyl isocyanate
C2H3NO
57.051
-45
39.5
0.923027
21.75
≈2.8
57.7
-7
5.3-26%
534
0.02
Methyl lactate, (±)-
C4H8O3
104.105
144.8
1.092820
49
>2.2%
385
Methyl methacrylate
C5H8O2
100.117
-47.55
100.5
0.937725
6.32
1.67
1.910
5.10
10
1.7-8.2%
100
1-Methylnaphthalene
C11H10
142.197
-30.43
244.7
1.020220
2.915
≈ 0
1.578
0.009
529
Methyloxirane
C3H6O
58.079
-111.9
35
0.8590
2.01
2.073
71.7
-37
3.1-27.5%
449
20
2-Methylpentane
C6H14
86.175
-153.6
60.26
0.65025
0.286
1.886
≈0
2.248
28.2
<-29
1-7%
264
500
3-Methylpentane
C6H14
86.175
-162.90
63.27
0.659825
0.306
1.886
≈ 0
2.213
25.3
-7
1.2-7%
278
500
2-Methyl-2,4-pentanediol
C6H14O2
118.174
-50
197.1
0.92315
23.4
2.9
2.843
<0.01
102
1-9%
306
25
2-Methyl-1-pentanol
C6H14O
102.174
149
0.826320
2.427
0.236
54
1.1-9.65%
310
4-Methyl-2-pentanol
C6H14O
102.174
-90
131.6
0.807520
4.07
2.672
0.698
41
1-6%
25
4-Methyl-2-pentanone
C6H12O
100.158
-84
116.5
0.796525
0.545
13.11
2.130
2.64
18
1-8%
448
50
2-Methylpropanenitrile
C4H7N
69.106
-71.5
103.9
0.770420
24.42
4.29
8
482
2-Methyl-2-propanethiol
C4H10S
90.187
-0.5
64.2
0.794325
5.475
1.66
24.2
<-29
Methyl propanoate
C4H8O2
88.106
-87.5
79.8
0.915020
0.431
6.200
1.943
11.5
-2
2.5-13%
469
2-Methylpropanoic acid
C4H8O2
88.106
-46
154.45
0.968120
1.226
2.58
1.08
1.964
56
2-9.2%
481
2-Methyl-1-propanol
C4H10O
74.121
-101.9
107.89
0.801820
3.33
17.93
1.64
2.449
1.39
28
2-11%
415
50
2-Methyl-2-propanol
C4H10O
74.121
25.69
82.4
0.788720
4.31
12.47
1.7
2.949
5.52
11
2-8%
478
100
2-Methylpyridine
C6H7N
93.127
-66.68
129.38
0.944320
10.18
1.85
1.703
1.5
39
538
3-Methylpyridine
C6H7N
93.127
-18.14
144.14
0.956620
11.10
2.40
1.704
0.795
4-Methylpyridine
C6H7N
93.127
3.67
145.36
0.954820
12.2
2.70
1.707
0.759
57
N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone
C5H9NO
99.131
-23.09
202
1.023025
32.55
4.1
3.105
0.04
96
1-10%
346
Methyl salicylate
C8H8O3
152.148
-8
222.9
1.18125
8.80
2.47
1.637
0.015
96
454
4-Methylstyrene
C9H10
118.175
-34.1
172.8
0.917325
0.245
53
0.8-11%
538
50
Morpholine
C4H9NO
87.120
-4.8
128
1.000520
2.02
7.42
1.55
1.892
1.34
37
1-11%
290
20
-Myrcene
C10H16
136.234
167
0.801315
2.3
0.280
Nickel carbonyl
C4NiO4
170.734
-19.3
43 (exp 60)
1.3125
1.198
0.05
L-Nicotine
C10H14N2
162.231
-79
247
1.009720
8.937
Nitric acid
HNO3
63.013
-41.6
83
1.55
2.17
1.744
2
2-Nitroanisole
C7H7NO3
153.136
10.5
272
1.254020
45.75
5.0
Nitrobenzene
C6H5NO2
123.110
5.7
210.8
1.203720
1.863
35.6
4.22
1.509
0.03
88
2-9%
482
1
Nitroethane
C2H5NO2
75.067
-89.5
114.0
1.044825
0.688
29.11
3.23
1.790
2.79
28
3-17%
414
100
Nitromethane
CH3NO2
61.041
-28.38
101.19
1.137120
0.630
37.27
3.46
1.746
4.79
35
7-22%
418
20
1-Nitropropane
C3H7NO2
89.094
-108
131.1
0.996125
0.798
24.70
3.66
1.97
1.36
36
2%-
421
25
2-Nitropropane
C3H7NO2
89.094
-91.3
120.2
0.982125
26.74
3.73
1.911
2.3
24
3-11%
428
10
N-Nitrosodiethylamine
C4H10N2O
102.134
176.9
0.942220
N-Nitrosodimethylamine
C2H6N2O
74.081
152
1.004820
2-Nitrotoluene
C7H7NO2
137.137
-10.4
222
1.161119
26.26
1.474
106
2
3-Nitrotoluene
C7H7NO2
137.137
15.5
232
1.158120
24.95
1.474
106
2
Nonane
C9H20
128.255
-53.46
150.82
0.719220
0.665
1.9722
≈ 0
2.217
0.570
31
0.8-2.9%
205
200
Nonanoic acid
C9H18O2
158.238
12.4
254.5
0.905220
7.01
2.475
0.79
2.290
1-Nonanol
C9H20O
144.254
-5
213.37
0.828020
9.12
8.83
2.470
260
1-Nonene
C9H18
126.239
-81.3
146.9
0.725325
0.586
2.180
≈ 0
2.142
0.714
26
4-Nonylphenol
C15H24O
220.351
42
≈295
0.95020
cis,cis-9,12-Octadecadienoic acid
C18H32O2
280.446
-7
0.902220
2.754
cis-9-Octadecenoic acid
C18H34O2
282.462
13.4
360
0.893520
2.336
1.18
2.043
189
363
Octane
C8H18
114.229
-56.82
125.67
0.698625
0.508
1.948
≈0
2.229
1.86
13
1-7%
206
300
Octanoic acid
C8H16O2
144.212
16.5
239
0.907325
5.02
2.85
1.15
2.066
Name
Mol. 
Form.
Mr
tm/°C
tb/°C
/
g mL–1
/
mPa s

/D
cp/
J g–1K–1
vp/
kPa
FP/
°C
Fl. Lim.
IT/
°C
TLV/
ppm


--- PAGE 2430 ---
15-23
LABORATORY SOLVENTS AND OTHER LIQUID REAGENTS (continued)
1-Octanol
C8H18O
130.228
-14.8
195.16
0.826225
7.29
10.30
1.8
2.344
0.01
81
270
2-Octanol
C8H18O
130.228
-31.6
179.3
0.819320
6.49
8.13
1.71
2.535
88
265
2-Octanone
C8H16O
128.212
-16
172.5
0.82020
9.51
2.7
2.132
52
1-Octene
C8H16
112.213
-101.7
121.29
0.714920
0.447
2.113
≈ 0
2.148
2.30
21
230
Oxetane
C3H6O
58.079
-97
47.6
0.893025
1.94
2-Oxetanone
C3H4O2
72.063
-33.4
162
1.146020
4.18
1.694
74
>2.9%
0.5
Oxirane
C2H4O
44.052
-112.5
10.6
0.882110
12.42
1.89
1.998
-20
3-100%
429
1
Oxiranemethanol, (±)-
C3H6O2
74.079
-45
167 dec
1.114325
2
Paraldehyde
C6H12O3
132.157
12.6
124.3
0.994320
1.079
1.43
36
>1.3%
238
Parathion
C10H14NO5PS
291.261
6.1
375
1.268120
Pentachloroethane
C2HCl5
202.294
-28.78
162.0
1.679620
2.25
3.716
0.92
0.859
0.478
cis-1,3-Pentadiene
C5H8
68.118
-140.8
44.1
0.691020
2.319
0.500
trans-1,3-Pentadiene
C5H8
68.118
-87.4
42
0.671025
0.585
Pentanal
C5H10O
86.132
-91.5
103
0.809520
10.00
4.58
12
222
50
Pentane
C5H12
72.149
-129.67
36.06
0.626220
0.224
1.8371
≈0
2.317
68.3
-40
2-8%
260
600
Pentanedial
C5H8O2
100.117
-14
188 dec
1,5-Pentanediol
C5H12O2
104.148
-18
239
0.991420
26.2
2.5
3.08
129
335
2,4-Pentanedione
C5H8O2
100.117
-23
138
0.972125
26.524
2.8
2.08
1.02
34
340
1-Pentanethiol
C5H12S
104.214
-75.65
126.6
0.85020
4.847
18
Pentanoic acid
C5H10O2
102.132
-33.6
186.1
0.933925
2.661
1.61
2.059
0.024
96
400
1-Pentanol
C5H12O
88.148
-77.6
137.98
0.814420
3.62
15.13
1.7
2.361
0.259
33
1-10%
300
2-Pentanol
C5H12O
88.148
-73
119.3
0.809420
3.47
13.71
1.66
2.716
0.804
34
1.2-9%
343
3-Pentanol
C5H12O
88.148
-69
116.25
0.820320
4.15
13.35
1.64
2.719
1.10
41
1.2-9%
435
2-Pentanone
C5H10O
86.132
-76.8
102.26
0.80920
0.470
15.45
2.7
2.137
4.97
7
2-8%
452
200
3-Pentanone
C5H10O
86.132
-39
101.7
0.809825
0.444
17.00
2.82
2.216
4.72
13
>1.6%
450
200
1-Pentene
C5H10
70.133
-165.12
29.96
0.640520
0.195
2.011
≈0.5
2.196
85.0
-18
1.5-8.7%
275
cis-2-Pentene
C5H10
70.133
-151.36
36.93
0.655620
≈ 0
2.163
66.0
<-20
trans-2-Pentene
C5H10
70.133
-140.21
36.34
0.643125
≈ 0
2.239
67.4
<-20
Pentyl acetate
C7H14O2
130.185
-70.8
149.2
0.875620
4.79
1.75
2.005
0.60
16
1-8%
360
50
Pentylamine
C5H13N
87.164
-55
104.3
0.754420
0.702
4.27
2.501
4.00
-1
2.2-22%
Perchloric acid
ClHO4
100.459
-112
≈90 dec
1.77
Peroxyacetic acid
C2H4O3
76.051
-0.2
110
1.22615
1.93
41
Phenol
C6H6O
94.111
40.89
181.87
1.054545
12.40
1.224
2.123
0.055
79
1.8-8.6%
715
5
2-Phenoxyethanol
C8H10O2
138.164
14
245
1.10222
121
Phenylhydrazine
C6H8N2
108.141
20.6
243.5
1.098620
13.03
7.15
2.007
88
0.1
1-Phenyl-2-propylamine, (±)-
C9H13N
135.206
203
0.930625
<100
Phosphinic acid
H3O2P
65.997
26.5
130
1.49
Phosphoric acid
H3O4P
97.995
42.4
407
1.480
Phosphoric trichloride
Cl3OP
153.331
1.18
105.5
1.645
14.1
2.54
0.905
0.1
Phosphorothioc trichloride
Cl3PS
169.398
-36.2
125
1.635
4.94
Phosphorus(III) bromide
Br3P
270.686
-41.5
173.2
2.8
Phosphorus(III) chloride
Cl3P
137.332
-93.6
76.1
1.574
0.529
3.498
0.56
0.2
-Pinene
C10H16
136.234
-64
156.2
0.853925
2.1787
0.64
33
255
-Pinene
C10H16
136.234
-61.5
166
0.86025
2.4970
0.61
38
275
Piperidine
C5H11N
85.148
-11.02
106.22
0.860620
1.573
4.33
1.2
2.113
4.28
16
1-10%
Propanal
C3H6O
58.079
-80
48
0.865725
0.321
18.5
2.72
2.362
42.2
-30
2.6-17%
207
1,2-Propanediol
C3H8O2
76.095
-60
187.6
1.036120
40.4
27.5
2.2
2.507
0.02
99
3-13%
371
1,3-Propanediol
C3H8O2
76.095
-27.7
214.4
1.053820
35.1
2.5
400
Propanenitrile
C3H5N
55.079
-92.78
97.14
0.781820
0.294
29.7
4.05
2.166
6.14
2
3-14%
512
Propanoic acid
C3H6O2
74.079
-20.5
141.15
0.988225
1.030
3.44
1.75
2.063
0.553
52
2.9-12.1%
465
10
Propanoic anhydride
C6H10O3
130.141
-45
170
1.011020
18.30
1.806
63
1.3-9.5%
285
1-Propanol
C3H8O
60.095
-124.39
97.2
0.799725
1.945
20.8
1.55
2.395
2.76
23
2-14%
412
200
2-Propanol
C3H8O
60.095
-87.9
82.3
0.780925
2.04
20.18
1.56
2.604
6.02
12
2-13%
399
400
Propargyl alcohol
C3H4O
56.063
-51.8
113.6
0.947820
20.8
1.13
36
1
Propyl acetate
C5H10O2
102.132
-93
101.54
0.887820
0.544
5.62
1.8
1.921
4.49
13
2-8%
450
200
Propylamine
C3H9N
59.110
-84.75
47.22
0.717320
0.376
5.08
1.17
2.776
42.1
-37
2-10%
318
Propylbenzene
C9H12
120.191
-99.6
159.24
0.859325
2.370
≈0
1.786
30
1-6%
450
Propyl butanoate
C7H14O2
130.185
-95.2
143.0
0.873020
4.3
0.618
37
Propylene carbonate
C4H6O3
102.089
-48.8
242
1.204720
66.14
4.9
2.141
135
Propyl formate
C4H8O2
88.106
-92.9
80.9
0.907320
0.485
6.92
1.89
1.945
10.9
-3
455
Propyl propanoate
C6H12O2
116.158
-75.9
122.5
0.880920
5.249
1.88
79
Pyridine
C5H5N
79.101
-41.70
115.23
0.981920
0.879
13.260
2.21
1.678
2.76
20
2-12%
482
5
Pyrrole
C4H5N
67.090
-23.39
129.79
0.969820
1.225
8.00
1.74
1.903
1.10
39
Pyrrolidine
C4H9N
71.121
-57.79
86.56
0.858620
0.704
8.30
1.6
2.202
8.40
3
2-Pyrrolidone
C4H7NO
85.105
25
251
1.12020
28.18
3.5
1.99
129
Quinoline
C9H7N
129.159
-14.78
237.16
1.097715
3.34
9.16
2.29
1.51
480
Name
Mol. 
Form.
Mr
tm/°C
tb/°C
/
g mL–1
/
mPa s

/D
cp/
J g–1K–1
vp/
kPa
FP/
°C
Fl. Lim.
IT/
°C
TLV/
ppm


--- PAGE 2431 ---
TeamLRN
15-24
LABORATORY SOLVENTS AND OTHER LIQUID REAGENTS (continued)
Safrole
C10H10O2
162.185
11.2
234.5
1.100020
100
Salicylaldehyde
C7H6O2
122.122
-7
197
1.167420
18.35
2.86
1.818
78
Selenium chloride
Cl2Se2
228.83
-85
130 dec
2.774
Selenium oxychloride
Cl2OSe
165.86
8.5
177
2.44
46.2
Selenium oxyﬂuoride
F2OSe
132.96
15
125
2.8
Styrene
C8H8
104.150
-30.65
145
0.901625
0.695
2.4737
0.123
1.747
0.81
31
1-7%
490
20
Sulfolane
C4H8O2S
120.171
27.6
287.3
1.272318
43.26
4.8
1.498
<0.01
177
Sulfur chloride
Cl2S2
135.037
-77
137
1.69
4.79
Sulfur dichloride
Cl2S
102.971
-122
59.6
1.62
2.915
0.36
Sulfuric acid
H2O4S
98.080
10.31
337
1.8
1.416
Sulfuryl chloride
Cl2O2S
134.970
-51
69.4
1.680
9.1
1.81
0.993
-Terpinene
C10H16
136.234
174
0.837519
2.4526
1,1,2,2-Tetrabromoethane
C2H2Br4
345.653
0
243.5
2.965520
6.72
1.38
0.479
0.003
335
1
Tetrabromosilane
Br4Si
347.702
5.39
154
2.8
0
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloro-1,2-
diﬂuoroethane
C2Cl4F2
203.830
24.8
92.8
1.595150
2.52
0.852
7.51
500
1,1,1,2-Tetrachloroethane
C2H2Cl4
167.849
-70.2
130.2
1.540620
1.437
0.92
1.6
47
5-12%
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane
C2H2Cl4
167.849
-42.4
145.2
1.595320
8.50
1.32
0.967
0.622
62
20-54%
1
Tetrachloroethene
C2Cl4
165.833
-22.3
121.3
1.623020
0.844
2.268
0
0.865
2.42
45
25
Tetrachloromethane
CCl4
153.823
-22.62
76.8
1.594020
0.908
2.2379
0
0.850
15.2
5
Tetrachlorosilane
Cl4Si
169.897
-68.74
57.65
1.5
99.4
0
0.855
Tetradecane
C14H30
198.388
5.82
253.58
0.759620
2.13
2.0343
≈ 0
0.002
112
>0.5%
200
Tetraethylene glycol
C8H18O5
194.226
-6.2
328
1.128515
20.44
2.208
182
Tetraﬂuoroboric acid
BF4H
87.813
130 dec
≈1.8
Tetrahydrofuran
C4H8O
72.106
-108.44
65
0.883325
0.456
7.52
1.75
1.720
21.6
-14
2-12%
321
200
Tetrahydrofurfuryl alcohol
C5H10O2
102.132
<-80
178
1.052420
13.48
2.1
1.774
0.100
75
1.5-9.7%
282
1,2,3,4-Tetrahydronaphthalene
C10H12
132.202
-35.7
207.6
0.964525
2.14
2.771
≈0
1.645
0.05
71
1-5%
385
Tetrahydropyran
C5H10O
86.132
-49.1
88
0.881420
5.66
1.74
1.82
9.54
-20
Tetrahydrothiophene
C4H8S
88.172
-96.2
121.1
0.998720
0.973
1.90
2.45
Tetramethylsilane
C4H12Si
88.224
-99.06
26.6
0.64819
1.921
0
2.313
94.2
Tetramethylurea
C5H12N2O
116.161
-0.6
176.5
0.968720
23.10
3.5
0.138
77
Tetranitromethane
CN4O8
196.033
13.8
126.1
1.638020
2.317
0
0.005
Thionyl bromide
Br2OS
207.873
-50
140
9.06
Thionyl chloride
Cl2OS
118.970
-101
75.6
1.631
8.675
1.45
1.017
Thiophene
C4H4S
84.140
-38.21
84.0
1.064920
2.739
0.55
1.471
10.6
-1
Tin(IV) chloride
Cl4Sn
260.521
-34.07
114.15
2.234
0
0.634
Titanium(IV) chloride
Cl4Ti
189.678
-24.12
136.45
1.73
0.766
Toluene
C7H8
92.139
-94.95
110.63
0.866820
0.560
2.379
0.37
1.707
3.79
4
1-7%
480
50
Toluene-2,4-diisocyanate
C9H6N2O2
174.156
20.5
251
1.224420
8.433
1.653
127
0.9-9.5%
0.005
Tribromomethane
CHBr3
252.731
8.69
149.1
2.878825
1.857
4.404
0.99
0.517
0.726
83
0.5
Tributylamine
C12H27N
185.349
-70
216.5
0.777020
2.340
0.8
0.01
63
1-5%
Tributyl borate
C12H27BO3
230.151
<-70
234
0.856720
2.23
0.77
93
Tributyrin
C15H26O6
302.363
-75
307.5
1.035020
5.72
1.837
180
>0.5%
407
Trichloroacetaldehyde
C2HCl3O
147.387
-57.5
97.8
1.51220
6.8
1.025
6.66
1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene
C6H3Cl3
181.447
16.92
213.5
1.45925
0.057
105
2.5-6.6%
571
1,1,1-Trichloroethane
C2H3Cl3
133.404
-30.01
74.09
1.339020
0.793
7.243
1.76
1.082
16.5
-1
8-13%
500
350
1,1,2-Trichloroethane
C2H3Cl3
133.404
-36.3
113.8
1.439720
7.1937
1.4
1.131
3.1
32
6-28%
460
10
Trichloroethene
C2HCl3
131.388
-84.7
87.21
1.464220
0.545
3.390
0.8
0.947
9.91
32
8-11%
420
50
Trichloroethylsilane
C2H5Cl3Si
163.506
-105.6
100.5
1.237320
2.04
6.29
22
Trichloroﬂuoromethane
CCl3F
137.368
-110.44
23.7
1.487920
0.421
3.00
0.46
0.885
106
1000
Trichloromethane
CHCl3
119.378
-63.41
61.17
1.478825
0.537
4.8069
1.04
0.957
26.2
10
(Trichloromethyl)benzene
C7H5Cl3
195.474
-4.42
221
1.372320
6.9
2.03
127
211
Trichloromethylsilane
CH3Cl3Si
149.480
-90
65.6
1.27320
1.91
1.091
22.5
-9
7.6->20%
>404
Trichloronitromethane
CCl3NO2
164.376
-64
112
1.655820
7.319
3.18
0.1
1,2,3-Trichloropropane
C3H5Cl3
147.431
-14.7
157
1.388920
7.5
1.245
0.492
71
3.2-12.6%
10
Trichlorosilane
Cl3HSi
135.452
-128.2
33
1.331
0.326
0.86
-50
104
1,1,2-Trichloro-1,2,2-
triﬂuoroethane
C2Cl3F3
187.375
-36.22
47.7
1.563525
0.656
2.41
0.908
44.8
1000
Tri-o-cresyl phosphate
C21H21O4P
368.363
11
410
1.195520
6.7
2.87
1.57
225
385
Tridecane
C13H28
184.361
-5.4
235.47
0.756420
1.724
2.0213
≈ 0
2.206
0.005
79
1-Tridecene
C13H26
182.345
-13
232.8
0.765820
1.50
2.139
≈ 0
2.149
79
Triethanolamine
C6H15NO3
149.188
20.5
335.4
1.124220
609
29.36
3.6
2.61
<0.01
179
1-10%
0.5
Triethylamine
C6H15N
101.190
-114.7
89
0.727520
0.347
2.418
0.66
2.173
7.70
-7
1-8%
249
1
Triethylene glycol
C6H14O4
150.173
-7
285
1.127415
23.69
2.18
177
1-9%
371
Triethylene glycol dimethyl ether
C8H18O4
178.227
-45
216
0.98620
7.62
111
Triethyl phosphate
C6H15O4P
182.154
-56.4
215.5
1.069520
13.20
3.1
115
454
Name
Mol. 
Form.
Mr
tm/°C
tb/°C
/
g mL–1
/
mPa s

/D
cp/
J g–1K–1
vp/
kPa
FP/
°C
Fl. Lim.
IT/
°C
TLV/
ppm


--- PAGE 2432 ---
15-25
LABORATORY SOLVENTS AND OTHER LIQUID REAGENTS (continued)
Triﬂuoroacetic acid
C2HF3O2
114.023
-15.2
73
1.535125
0.808
8.42
2.28
15.1
(Triﬂuoromethyl)benzene
C7H5F3
146.110
-28.95
102.1
1.188420
9.22
2.86
1.289
5.14
12
1,2,3-Trimethylbenzene
C9H12
120.191
-25.4
176.12
0.894420
2.656
≈ 0
1.800
44
0.8-6.6%
470
25
1,2,4-Trimethylbenzene
C9H12
120.191
-43.77
169.38
0.875820
2.377
≈0
1.789
0.30
44
1-6%
500
25
1,3,5-Trimethylbenzene
C9H12
120.191
-44.72
164.74
0.861525
2.279
0
1.741
0.33
50
1-5%
559
25
Trimethyl borate
C3H9BO3
103.912
-29.3
67.5
0.91525
2.2762
1.828
17.2
-8
Trimethylchlorosilane
C3H9ClSi
108.642
-40
60
0.85625
30.7
-28
395
2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
C8H18
114.229
-107.3
99.22
0.687825
1.943
≈ 0
2.093
6.50
-12
418
300
2,3,3-Trimethylpentane
C8H18
114.229
-100.9
114.8
0.726220
1.9780
≈ 0
2.150
3.60
<21
425
300
Trimethyl phosphate
C3H9O4P
140.074
-46
197.2
1.214420
20.6
3.2
0.11
107
2,4,6-Trimethylpyridine
C8H11N
121.180
-46
170.6
0.916622
7.807
2.05
Trinitroglycerol
C3H5N3O9
227.087
13.5
exp 218
1.593120
19.25
270
0.05
Undecane
C11H24
156.309
-25.5
195.9
0.740220
1.098
1.9972
≈ 0
2.207
69
Vanadium(IV) chloride
Cl4V
192.753
-25.7
148
1.816
3.05
Vanadyl trichloride
Cl3OV
173.299
-79
127
1.829
3.4
Vinyl acetate
C4H6O2
86.090
-93.2
72.8
0.925625
1.79
1.969
15.4
-8
2.6-13.4%
402
10
4-Vinylcyclohexene
C8H12
108.181
-108.9
128
0.829920
1.87
16
269
0.1
Water
H2O
18.015
0.00
100.0
0.9970
0.890
80.100
1.8546
4.180
o-Xylene
C8H10
106.165
-25.2
144.5
0.880210
0.760
2.562
0.64
1.753
0.88
32
1-7%
463
100
m-Xylene
C8H10
106.165
-47.8
139.12
0.859625
0.581
2.359
≈0
1.724
1.13
27
1-7%
527
100
p-Xylene
C8H10
106.165
13.25
138.37
0.856625
0.603
2.2735
0
1.710
1.19
27
1-7%
528
100
2,4-Xylenol
C8H10O
122.164
24.5
210.98
0.965020
5.060
1.4
0.022
Name
Mol. 
Form.
Mr
tm/°C
tb/°C
/
g mL–1
/
mPa s

/D
cp/
J g–1K–1
vp/
kPa
FP/
°C
Fl. Lim.
IT/
°C
TLV/
ppm


--- PAGE 2433 ---
TeamLRN
15-26
MISCIBILITY OF ORGANIC SOLVENTS
The chart below gives qualitative information on the miscibility of pairs of organic liquids. Two liquids are considered miscible (indicated by M
in the chart) if  mixing equal volumes produces a single liquid phase. If two phases separate, they are considered immiscible (I). An entry of P indi-
cates two phases whose volumes differ appreciably, suggesting a partial miscibility of the components. The symbol R indicates a reaction between
the components. All data refer to room temperature. 
The codes for the columns are:
REFERENCES
1. Drury, J. S., Ind. Eng. Chem. 44, 2744, 1959.
2. Jackson, W. M., and Drury, J. S., Ind. Eng. Chem. 51, 1491, 1959.
A
Acetone
J
Diethyl ether
S
Methyl isopropyl ketone
B
Benzaldehyde
K
N,N-Dimethylaniline
T
Nitromethane
C
Benzene
L
Dipentylamine
U
1-Octanol
D
Butyl acetate
M
Ethyl alcohol
V
1,3-Propanediol
E
Butyl alcohol
N
Ethylene glycol
W
Pyridine
F
Carbon tetrachloride
O
Ethylene glycol monoethyl ether X
Triethylenetetramine
G
2-Chloroethanol
P
Formamide
Y
Triethyl phosphate
H
Chloroform
Q
Furfuryl alcohol
I
o-Cresol
R
Glycerol
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W X
Y
Acetone
-
M M M M M M M
M M M M M M M M
I
M M M M M M M
Adiponitrile
M
M
M
I
I
M
M
I
M M
I
M M
2-Amino-2-methyl-1-propanol
M M M M M M
M M
M M
M M M
M M M M
p-Anisaldehyde
M
I
M
I
I
M
Benzaldehyde
M
-
M M M M
M M
M
P
M M
P
M M M M
Benzene
M M
-
M M M M M
M M M M
I
M
I
M
I
M
I
M
I
M M M
Benzonitrile
M
M
M M
M M
M
I
I
M
I
I
M
Benzothiazole
M
M
M M
M M
M M
I
M
I
M M
Benzyl alcohol
M M M M M M
M M
M M
M M M
M M M M
Benzyl mercaptan
M
M
M M
M M
M
I
I
M
I
I
M
2-Bromoethyl acetate
M
P
M
R
M
M
R
1,3-Butanediol
M
I
M M
P
M M
M
M M
2,3-Butanediol
M
P
M M M
M M
M
M M
Butyl acetate
M M M
-
M M
M M
M
P
I
M
I
M M
P
M
Butyl alcohol
M M M M
-
M
M M
M M
M M M
M M M M
Carbon tetrachloride
M M M M M
-
M M
M
I
I
M
I
M M
I
M
2-Chloroethanol
M
M
-
M M
M
M
M M M
Chloroform
M
M
M
-
M
M M
P
M
I
M
M
M M
3-Chloro-1,2-propanediol
M
I
M M M
R
M
M
M
R
Cinnamaldehyde
M
M
M M
M M
I
M
I
M
I
R
M
o-Cresol
M
-
M M
M
M
M
Diacetone alcohol
M M
P
M M
P
M M
M M
M M
I
M M M M
Dibenzyl ether
M
M
M M
M
I
M
I
M
M M
Dibutylamine
R
M M
P
M
Dibutyl carbonate
M
M
M
M M
M
I
Dibutyl ether
M M M M M M
M M
M
I
I
M
I
I
M
I
M
Diethanolamine
M
I
I
I
M
I
I
P
M M
M M M
I
M M M
Diethylacetic acid
M
M
M M
R
M M M
I
M
M
R
M
Diethylene glycol dibutyl ether
M
M
M M M
R
M
M
M
Diethylene glycol diethyl ether
M
M
M M M
M M
M
M M
Diethylene glycol monobutyl ether
M
M
M M M
M M
M
M M
Diethylene glycol monoethyl ether
M
M
M M M
M M
M
M M
Diethylene glycol monomethyl ether
M
M
M
M
M M
M
M M


--- PAGE 2434 ---
15-27
MISCIBILITY OF ORGANIC SOLVENTS (continued)
Diethylenetriamine
M
M
R
M
I
M M M
M
R
M M
Diethyl ether
M M M M M M M M
-
M M M
I
M
I
M
I
M M M
I
M M M
Diethylformamide
M
M
M M
R
M M M
M M
M
R
M
Dihexyl ether
M
M
M M
M M
I
M
I
M
I
I
Diisobutyl ketone
M
M
M M
M M
I
M
I
M
I
M M
Diisopropylamine
M
M
R
M
M M M M
M M
M
M M
N,N-Dimethylaniline
M M M M M M
M
-
M
I
I
M
I
M M
I
M
Dipentylamine
M
M
M
M
-
M
P
M
P
M
M
I
M
N,N-Dipropylaniline
M
M
M M M M
M M M M
I
M
I
M
I
M
I
M M M
Dipropylene glycol
M
M
M M M M
M
M
M M
Ethyl alcohol
M M M M M M
M
M M M
-
M M M M M M M M M M M M
Ethyl benzoate
M M M M M M
M
M M M M
I
I
M
I
M M M
P
M M
Ethyl chloroacetate
M
M
M M
M M
I
M
I
M
I
R
M
Ethyl cinnamate
M
M
M
M M
I
M
I
M
I
M M
Ethylene glycol
M
P
I
P
M
I
P
M
I
I
P
M
-
M M M
I
I
M M M M
Ethylene glycol monobutyl ether
M
M
M M M
M M
M
M M
Ethylene glycol monoethyl ether
M
M
M M M
M M
-
M
M M
Ethylene glycol monomethyl ether
M
M
M M
M M
M M
2-Ethyl-1-hexanol
M M M M M M
M M
M M
I
M
I
I
M M M
Ethyl phenylacetate
M
M
M M
M
I
M
I
M
I
M M
Ethyl thiocyanate
M
M
M M
M M
M
I
I
M
I
I
M
Formamide
M M
I
I
M
I
I
I
M M
-
M M
M
I
M M
Furfuryl alcohol
M M M M M M
M M
M M
M
-
M
M M M M
Glycerol
I
P
I
I
M
I
I
M
I
I
P
M M
M M
-
I
I
I
M M M
1-Heptadecanol
M
M
M
M M
M
M
3-Heptanol
M
M
M M
M M M M
I
M
M M
Heptyl acetate
M
M
M M
M
I
M
I
M
I
R
M
Hexanenitrile
M
M
M M
M M
I
M
I
M
I
M M
Isobutyl mercaptan
M
M
M M
M M
M
I
I
M
I
R
M
Isopentyl acetate
M
M
M M
M M
I
M
I
M
I
M M
Isopentyl alcohol
M M M M M M
M M
M M
M M
I
M M M M
Isopentyl sulﬁde
M
M
M M
M M
M
I
I
I
I
I
M
Methyl disulﬁde
M
M
M M
M M
M
I
I
M
I
R
M
Methyl isobutyl ketone
M M M M M M
M M
M
I
P
M
I
M M
I
M
Methyl isopropyl ketone
M
M
M M
M
M M
I
M
I
-
M
R
M
4-Methylpentanoic acid
M
M
M
M M M M
I
M
M
R
M
Nitromethane
M M
I
M M M
M M
M
I
M M
I
-
P
I
M
1-Octanol
M M M M M M
M M
M M
I
M
I
P
-
M M
o-Phenetidine
M
M
M M
M M M M
M
M
M
1,2-Propanediol
M
I
M M
P
M M
M
M M
1,3-Propanediol
M M
I
P
M
I
M M
I
I
M M M
M M M M
I
M
-
M M
Pyridine
M M M M M M M
M M
M M M M M M
M M M
-
M
Tetradecanol
M
M
M M
M M
I
M
I
M
P
M M
Tributyl phosphate
M
M
M M
M M
P
M
I
M
M
M M
Triethylene glycol
M
P
M M
I
P
M
M
M M
Triethylenetetramine
M
M
M M
M
I
M M M
M
R
M
-
M
Triethyl phosphate
M
M
M M M
M M
M
M M
-
2,6,8-Trimethyl-4-nonanone
M
M
M M
M M
I
M
I
M
I
I
M
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W X
Y


--- PAGE 2435 ---
TeamLRN
15-28
DENSITY OF SOLVENTS AS A FUNCTION OF TEMPERATURE
The table below lists the density of several common solvents in the temperature range from 0°C to 100°C. The values have been calculated from
the Rackett Equation using parameters in the reference. Density values refer to the liquid at its saturation vapor pressure; thus entries for tempera-
tures above the normal boiling point are for pressures greater than atmospheric.
REFERENCE
Lide, D. R., and Kehiaian, H. V., Handbook of Thermophysical and Thermochemical Data, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1994.
Density in g/mL
Solvent
0°C
10°C
20°C
30°C
40°C
50°C
60°C
70°C
80°C
90°C
100°C
Acetic acid
1.051
1.038
1.025
1.012
0.9993
0.9861
0.9728
0.9592
0.9454
Acetone
0.8129
0.8016
0.7902
0.7785
0.7666
0.7545
0.7421
0.7293
0.7163
0.7029
0.6890
Acetonitrile
0.7825
0.7707
0.7591
0.7473
0.7353
0.7231
0.7106
0.6980
0.6851
Aniline
1.041
1.033
1.025
1.016
1.008
1.000
0.9909
0.9823
0.9735
0.9646
0.9557
Benzene
0.8884
0.8786
0.8686
0.8584
0.8481
0.8376
0.8269
0.8160
0.8049
0.7935
1-Butanol
0.8293
0.8200
0.8105
0.8009
0.7912
0.7812
0.7712
0.7609
0.7504
0.7398
0.7289
Butylamine
0.7606
0.7512
0.7417
0.7320
0.7221
0.7120
0.7017
0.6911
0.6803
0.6693
0.6579
Carbon disulﬁde
1.290
1.277
1.263
1.248
1.234
Chlorobenzene
1.127
1.116
1.106
1.096
1.085
1.074
1.064
1.053
1.042
1.030
1.019
Cyclohexane
0.7872
0.7784
0.7694
0.7602
0.7509
0.7414
0.7317
0.7218
0.7117
0.7013
Decane
0.7447
0.7374
0.7301
0.7226
0.7151
0.7074
0.6997
0.6919
0.6839
0.6758
0.6676
1-Decanol
0.8294
0.8229
0.8162
0.8093
0.8024
0.7955
0.7884
0.7813
0.7740
Dichloromethane
1.362
1.344
1.326
1.307
1.289
1.269
1.250
1.229
1.208
1.187
1.165
Diethyl ether
0.7368
0.7254
0.7137
0.7018
0.6896
0.6770
0.6639
0.6505
0.6366
0.6220
0.6068
N,N-Dimethylaniline
0.9638
0.9562
0.9483
0.9401
0.9318
0.9234
0.9150
0.9064
0.8978
0.8890
Ethanol
0.8121
0.8014
0.7905
0.7793
0.7680
0.7564
0.7446
0.7324
0.7200
0.7073
0.6942
Ethyl acetate
0.9245
0.9126
0.9006
0.8884
0.8759
0.8632
0.8503
0.8370
0.8234
0.8095
0.7952
Ethylbenzene
0.8836
0.8753
0.8668
0.8582
0.8495
0.8407
0.8318
0.8228
0.8136
0.8043
0.7948
Ethyl formate
0.9472
0.9346
0.9218
0.9087
0.8954
0.8818
0.8678
0.8535
0.8389
0.8238
0.8082
Ethyl propanoate
0.9113
0.9005
0.8895
0.8784
0.8671
0.8556
0.8439
0.8319
0.8197
0.8072
0.7944
Heptane
0.7004
0.6921
0.6837
0.6751
0.6664
0.6575
0.6485
0.6393
0.6298
0.6202
0.6102
Hexane
0.6774
0.6685
0.6594
0.6502
0.6407
0.6311
0.6212
0.6111
0.6006
0.5899
0.5789
1-Hexanol
0.8359
0.8278
0.8195
0.8111
0.8027
0.7941
0.7854
0.7766
0.7676
0.7585
0.7492
Isopropylbenzene
0.8769
0.8696
0.8615
0.8533
0.8450
0.8366
0.8280
0.8194
0.8106
0.8017
0.7927
Methanol
0.8157
0.8042
0.7925
0.7807
0.7685
0.7562
0.7435
0.7306
0.7174
0.7038
0.6898
Methyl acetate
0.9606
0.9478
0.9346
0.9211
0.9074
0.8933
0.8790
0.8643
0.8491
0.8336
0.8176
N-Methylaniline
1.0010
0.9933
0.9859
0.9785
0.9709
0.9633
0.9556
0.9478
0.9399
0.9319
0.9239
Methylcyclohexane
0.7858
0.7776
0.7693
0.7608
0.7522
0.7435
0.7346
0.7255
0.7163
0.7069
0.6973
Methyl formate
1.003
0.9887
0.9739
0.9588
0.9433
0.9275
0.9112
0.8945
0.8772
0.8594
0.8409
Methyl propanoate
0.9383
0.9268
0.9150
0.9030
0.8907
0.8783
0.8656
0.8526
0.8393
0.8257
0.8117
Nitromethane
1.139
1.125
1.111
1.097
1.083
1.069
1.055
1.040
1.026
Nonane
0.7327
0.7252
0.7176
0.7099
0.7021
0.6941
0.6861
0.6779
0.6696
0.6611
0.6525
Octane
0.7185
0.7106
0.7027
0.6945
0.6863
0.6779
0.6694
0.6608
0.6520
0.6430
0.6338
Pentanoic acid
0.9563
0.9476
0.9389
0.9301
0.9211
0.9121
0.9029
0.8937
0.8843
0.8748
0.8652
1-Propanol
0.8252
0.8151
0.8048
0.7943
0.7837
0.7729
0.7619
0.7506
0.7391
0.7273
0.7152
2-Propanol
0.8092
0.7982
0.7869
0.7755
0.7638
0.7519
0.7397
0.7272
0.7143
0.7011
0.6876
Propyl acetate
0.9101
0.8994
0.8885
0.8775
0.8662
0.8548
0.8432
0.8313
0.8192
0.8069
0.7942
Propylbenzene
0.8779
0.8700
0.8619
0.8538
0.8456
0.8373
0.8289
0.8204
0.8117
0.8030
0.7943
Propyl formate
0.9275
0.9166
0.9053
0.8938
0.8821
0.8702
0.8581
0.8457
0.8330
0.8201
0.8068
Tetrachloromethane
1.629
1.611
1.593
1.575
1.557
1.538
1.518
1.499
1.479
1.458
1.437
Toluene
0.8846
0.8757
0.8667
0.8576
0.8483
0.8389
0.8294
0.8197
0.8098
0.7998
0.7896
Trichloromethane
1.524
1.507
1.489
1.471
1.452
1.433
1.414
1.394
2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
0.6921
0.6836
0.6750
0.6663
0.6574
0.6484
0.6391
0.6296
0.6199
o-Xylene
0.8801
0.8717
0.8633
0.8547
0.8460
0.8372
0.8282
0.8191
0.8099
m-Xylene
0.8813
0.8729
0.8644
0.8558
0.8470
0.8382
0.8292
0.8201
0.8109
0.8015
0.7920
p-Xylene
0.8609
0.8523
0.8436
0.8347
0.8258
0.8167
0.8075
0.7981
0.7886


--- PAGE 2436 ---
15-19
DEPENDENCE OF BOILING POINT ON PRESSURE
The normal boiling point of a liquid is defined as the temperature at which the vapor pressure reaches standard atmospheric pressure, 101.325 kPa.
The change in boiling point with pressure may be calculated from the representation of the vapor pressure by the Antoine Equation,
ln p = A1 – A2/(T + A3)
where p is the vapor pressure, T the absolute temperature, and A1, A2, and A3 are constants. This table, which has been calculated using the Antoine
constants in Reference 1, gives values of ∆t/∆p for a number of liquids, in units of both °C/kPa and °C/mmHg. The correction to the boiling point is
generally accurate to 0.1 to 0.2 °C as long as the pressure is within 10% of standard atmospheric pressure.
A slightly less accurate estimate of ∆t/∆p may be obtained from the Claussius-Clapeyron equation, with the assumption that the change in volume
upon vaporization equals the ideal-gas volume of the vapor. This leads to the equation
∆t/∆p  = RTb2 /p0 ∆vapH(Tb)
where R is the molar gas constant, p0 is 101.325 kPa, Tb is the normal boiling point temperature (absolute), and ∆vapH(Tb) is the molar enthalpy of
vaporization at the normal boiling point. Values of the last quantity may be obtained from the table “Enthalpy of Vaporization” in Section 6.
REFERENCE
1. Lide, D.R., and Kehiaian, H.V., CRC Handbook of Thermophysical and Thermochemical Data, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1994, pp. 49-
59.
tb
∆t/∆p
Compound
°C
°C/kPa
°C/mmHg
Acetaldehyde
20.1
0.261
0.0348
Acetic acid
117.9
0.324
0.0432
Acetone
56.0
0.289
0.0385
Acetonitrile
81.6
0.316
0.0421
Ammonia
-33.33
0.198
0.0264
Aniline
184.1
0.378
0.0504
Anisole
153.7
0.367
0.0489
Benzaldehyde
179.0
0.392
0.0523
Benzene
80.0
0.321
0.0428
Bromine
58.8
0.300
0.0400
Butane
-0.5
0.267
0.0356
1-Butanol
117.7
0.278
0.0371
Carbon disulfide
46.2
0.304
0.0405
Chlorine
-34.04
0.224
0.0299
Chlorobenzene
131.7
0.365
0.0487
1-Chlorobutane
78.6
0.321
0.0428
Chloroethane
12.3
0.262
0.0349
Chloroethylene
-13.3
0.241
0.0321
Cyclohexane
80.7
0.328
0.0437
Cyclohexanol
160.8
0.344
0.0459
Cyclohexanone
155.4
0.382
0.0509
Decane
174.1
0.388
0.0517
Dibutyl ether
140.2
0.363
0.0484
Dichloromethane
39.6
0.276
0.0368
Diethyl ether
34.5
0.278
0.0371
Dimethyl sulfoxide
189.0
0.379
0.0505
1,4-Dioxane
101.5
0.321
0.0428
Dipropyl ether
90.0
0.326
0.0435
Ethanol
78.2
0.249
0.0332
Ethyl acetate
77.1
0.300
0.0400
Ethylene glycol
197.3
0.331
0.0441
Heptane
98.5
0.336
0.0448
Hexafluorobenzene
80.2
0.305
0.0407
Hexane
68.7
0.314
0.0419
1-Hexanol
157.6
0.318
0.0424
Hydrogen fluoride
20.1
0.276
0.0368
Iodomethane
42.5
0.291
0.0388
Isobutane
-11.7
0.254
0.0339
Methanol
64.6
0.251
0.0335
Methyl acetate
56.8
0.282
0.0376
Methyl formate
31.7
0.582
0.0776
N-Methylaniline
196.2
0.396
0.0528
N-Methylformamide
199.5
0.371
0.0495
Nitrobenzene
210.8
0.418
0.0557
Nitromethane
101.1
0.320
0.0427
1-Octanol
195.1
0.360
0.0480
Pentane
36.0
0.289
0.0385
1-Pentanol
137.9
0.296
0.0395
Phenol
181.8
0.349
0.0465
Propane
-42.1
0.224
0.0299
1-Propanol
97.2
0.261
0.0348
2-Propanol
82.3
0.247
0.0329
Pyridine
115.2
0.340
0.0453
Pyrrole
129.7
0.330
0.0440
Pyrrolidine
86.5
0.309
0.0412
Styrene
145.1
0.369
0.0492
Sulfur dioxide
-10.05
0.221
0.0295
Tetrachloroethylene
121.3
0.354
0.0472
Tetrachloromethane
76.8
0.325
0.0433
Toluene
110.6
0.353
0.0471
Trichloroethylene
87.2
0.330
0.0440
Trichloromethane
61.1
0.302
0.0403
Trimethylamine
2.8
0.248
0.0331
Water
100.0
0.276
0.0368
o-Xylene
144.5
0.373
0.0497
m-Xylene
139.1
0.368
0.0491
p-Xylene
138.3
0.369
0.0492
tb
∆t/∆p
Compound
°C
°C/kPa
°C/mmHg


--- PAGE 2437 ---
TeamLRN
15-20
EBULLIOSCOPIC CONSTANTS FOR CALCULATION OF BOILING POINT ELEVATION
The boiling point Tb of a dilute solution of a non-volatile, non-dissociating solute is elevated relative to that of the pure solvent. If the solution is
ideal (i.e., follows Raoult’s Law), the amount of elevation depends only on the number of particles of solute present. Hence the change in boiling point
∆Tb can be expressed as
∆Tb = Eb m2
where m2 is the molality (moles of solute per kilogram of solvent) and Eb is the Ebullioscopic Constant, a characteristic property of the solvent. The
Ebullioscopic Constant may be calculated from the relation
Eb = R Tb2 M/∆vapH
where R is the molar gas constant, Tb is the normal boiling point temperature (absolute) of the solvent, M the molar mass of the solvent, and ∆vapH
the molar enthalpy (heat) of vaporization of the solvent at its normal boiling point.
This table lists Eb values for some common solvents, as calculated from data in the table “Enthalpy of Vaporization” in Section 6.
Compound
Eb/K kg mol–1
Acetic acid
3.22
Acetone
1.80
Acetonitrile
1.44
Aniline
3.82
Anisole
4.20
Benzaldehyde
4.24
Benzene
2.64
1-Butanol
2.17
Carbon disulfide
2.42
Chlorobenzene
4.36
1-Chlorobutane
3.13
Cyclohexane
2.92
Cyclohexanol
3.5
Decane
6.10
Dichloromethane
2.42
Diethyl ether
2.20
Dimethyl sulfoxide
3.22
1,4-Dioxane
3.01
Ethanol
1.23
Ethyl acetate
2.82
Ethylene glycol
2.26
Heptane
3.62
Hexane
2.90
Iodomethane
4.31
Methanol
0.86
Methyl acetate
2.21
N-Methylaniline
4.3
N-Methylformamide
2.2
Nitrobenzene
5.2
Nitromethane
2.09
1-Octanol
5.06
Phenol
3.54
1-Propanol
1.66
2-Propanol
1.58
Pyridine
2.83
Pyrrole
2.33
Pyrrolidine
2.32
Tetrachloroethylene
6.18
Tetrachloromethane
5.26
Toluene
3.40
Trichloroethylene
4.52
Trichloromethane
3.80
Water
0.513
o-Xylene
4.25
Compound
Eb/K kg mol–1


--- PAGE 2438 ---
15-21
CRYOSCOPIC CONSTANTS FOR CALCULATION OF FREEZING POINT DEPRESSION
The freezing point Tf of a dilute solution of a non-volatile, non-dissociating solute is depressed relative to that of the pure solvent. If the solution
is ideal (i.e., follows Raoult’s Law), this lowering is a function only of the number of particles of solute present. Thus the absolute value of the lowering
of freezing point ∆Tf can be expressed as
∆Tf = Ef m2
where m2 is the molality (moles of solute per kilogram of solvent) and Ef is the Cryoscopic Constant, a characteristic property of the solvent. The
Cryoscopic Constant may be calculated from the relation
Ef = R Tf2 M/∆fusH
where R is the molar gas constant, Tb is the freezing point temperature (absolute) of the solvent, M the molar mass of the solvent, and ∆fusH the molar
enthalpy (heat) of fusion of the solvent.
This table lists cryscopic constants for selected substances, as calculated from data in the table “Enthalpy of Fusion” in Section 6.
Compound
Ef/K kg mol–1
Acetamide
3.92
Acetic acid
3.63
Acetophenone
5.16
Aniline
5.23
Benzene
5.07
Benzonitrile
5.35
Benzophenone
8.58
(+)-Camphor
37.8
1-Chloronaphthalene
7.68
o-Cresol
5.92
m-Cresol
7.76
p-Cresol
7.20
Cyclohexane
20.8
Cyclohexanol
42.2
cis-Decahydronaphthalene
6.42
trans-Decahydronaphthalene
4.70
Dibenzyl ether
6.17
p-Dichlorobenzene
7.57
Diethanolamine
3.16
Dimethyl sulfoxide
3.85
1,4-Dioxane
4.63
Diphenylamine
8.38
Ethylene glycol
3.11
Formamide
4.25
Formic acid
2.38
Glycerol
3.56
Methylcyclohexane
2.60
Naphthalene
7.45
Nitrobenzene
6.87
Phenol
6.84
Pyridine
4.26
Quinoline
6.73
Succinonitrile
19.3
1,1,2,2-Tetrabromoethane
21.4
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloro-1,2-difluoroethane
41.0
Toluene
3.55
p-Toluidine
4.91
Tribromomethane
15.0
Water
1.86
p-Xylene
4.31
Compound
Ef/K kg mol–1


--- PAGE 2445 ---
TeamLRN
© 2000 CRC Press LLC
LOW TEMPERATURE BATHS FOR MAINTAINING CONSTANT TEMPERATURE
A liquid-solid slurry is a convenient means of maintaining a constant temperature environment below room temperature. The following is a list of
readily available organic liquids suitable for this purpose, arranged in order of their melting (freezing) points tm. The normal boiling points tb are also given.
Compound
tm/°C
tb/°C
Isopentane (2-Methylbutane)
-159.9
27.8
Methylcyclopentane
-142.5
71.8
3-Chloropropene (Allyl chloride)
-134.5
45.1
Pentane
-129.7
36.0
Allyl alcohol
-129
97.0
Ethanol
-114.1
78.2
Carbon disulfide
-111.5
46
Isobutyl alcohol
-108
107.8
Toluene
-94.9
110.6
Acetone
-94.8
56.0
Ethyl acetate
-83.6
77.1
Dry ice + acetone
-78
p-Cymene
-68.9
177.1
Trichloromethane (Chloroform)
-63.6
61.1
N-Methylaniline
-57
196.2
Chlorobenzene
-45.2
131.7
Anisole
-37.5
153.7
Bromobenzene
-30.6
156.0
Tetrachloromethane (Carbon tetrachloride)
-23
76.8
Benzonitrile
-12.7
191.1


--- PAGE 2452 ---
DIELECTRIC STRENGTH OF INSULATING MATERIALS
L. I. Berger
The loss of the dielectric properties by a sample of a gaseous, liquid, or solid insulator as a result of application to the sample of an electric field*
greater than a certain critical magnitude is called dielectric breakdown. The critical magnitude of electric field at which the breakdown of a material
takes place is called the dielectric strength of the material (or breakdown voltage). The dielectric strength of a material depends on the specimen
thickness (as a rule, thin films have greater dielectric strength than that of thicker samples of a material), the electrode shape**, the rate of the applied
voltage increase, the shape of the voltage vs. time curve, and the medium surrounding the sample, e.g., air or other gas (or a liquid — for solid materials
only).
Breakdown in Gases
The current carriers in gases are free electrons and ions generated by external radiation. The equilibrium concentration of these particles at normal
pressure is about 103 cm-3, and hence the electrical conductivity is very small, of the order of 10-16 - 10-15 S/cm. But in a strong electric field, these
particles acquire kinetic energy along their free pass, large enough to ionize the gas molecules. The new charged particles ionize more molecules; this
avalanche-like process leads to formation between the electrodes of channels of conducting plasma (streamers), and the electrical resistance of the space
between the electrodes decreases virtually to zero.
Because the dielectric strength (breakdown voltage) of gases strongly depends on the electrode geometry and surface condition and the gas pressure,
it is generally accepted to present the data for a particular gas as a fraction of the dielectric strength of either nitrogen or sulfur hexafluoride measured
at the same conditions. In Table 1, the data are presented in comparison with the dielectric strength of nitrogen, which is considered equal to 1.00. For
convenience to the reader, a few average magnitudes of the dielectric strength of some gases are expressed in kilovolts per millimeter. The data in the
table relate to the standard conditions, unless indicated otherwise.
Breakdown in Liquids
If a liquid is pure, the breakdown mechanism in it is similar to that in gases. If a liquid contains liquid impurities in the form of small drops with
greater dielectric constant than that of the main liquid, the breakdown is the result of formation of ellipsoids from these drops by the electric field. In
a strong enough electric field, these ellipsoids merge and form a high-conductivity channel between the electrodes. The current increases the
temperature in the channel, liquid boils, and the current along the steam canal leads to breakdown. Formation of a conductive channel (bridge) between
the electrodes is observed also in liquids with solid impurities. If a liquid contains gas impurities in the form of small bubbles, breakdown is the result
of heating of the liquid in strong electric fields. In the locations with the highest current density, the liquid boils, the size of the gas bubbles increases,
they merge and form gaseous channels between the electrodes, and the breakdown medium is again the gas plasma.
Breakdown in Solids
It is known that the current in solid insulators does not obey Ohm’s law in strong electric fields. The current density increases almost exponentially
with the electric field, and at a certain field magnitude it jumps to very high magnitudes at which a specimen of a material is destroyed. The two known
kinds of electric breakdown are thermal and electrical breakdowns. The former is the result of material heating by the electric current. Destruction of
a sample of a material happens when, at a certain voltage, the amount of heat produced by the current exceeds the heat release through the sample surface;
the breakdown voltage in this case is proportional to the square root of the ratio of the thermal conductivity and electrical conductivity of the material.
The electrical breakdown results from the tunneling of the charge carriers from electrodes or from the valence band or from the impurity levels into
the conduction band, or by the impact ionization. The tunnel effect breakdown happens mainly in thin layers, e.g., in thin p-n junctions. Otherwise,
the impact ionization mechanism dominates. For this mechanism, the dielectric strength of an insulator can be estimated using Boltzmann’s kinetic
equation for electrons in a crystal.
In the following tables, the dielectric strength values are for room temperature and normal atmospheric pressure, unless indicated otherwise.
*
The unit of electric field in the SI system is newton per coulomb or volt per meter.
** For example, the U.S. standard ASTM D149 is based on use of symmetrical electrodes, while per U.K. standard BS2918 one electrode is a
plane and the other is a rod with the axis normal to the plane.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2000 by CRC PRESS LLC 


--- PAGE 2455 ---
TeamLRN
Polyphenylene sulfide
15.0
6
Polycarbonate
15.0
6
Acetal homopolymer resin (molding resin) 15.0
6
Acetal copolymer resin
15.0
6
Thermosetting Molding Compounds
Glass-filled allyl
15.7
6
(Type GDI-30 per MIL-M-14G)
Glass-filled epoxy, electrical grade
15.4
6
Glass-filled phenolic
15.0
6
(Type GPI-100 per MIL-M-14G)
Glass-filled alkyd/polyester
14.8
6
(Type MAI-60 per MIL-M-14G)
Glass-filled melamine
13.4
6
(Type MMI-30 per MIL-M-14G)
Extrusion Compounds for High-Temperature Insulation
Polytetrafluoroethylene
19.7
6
Perfluoroalkoxy polymer
21.7
6
Fluorinated ethylene-propylene copolymer 19.7
6
Ethylene-tetrafluoroethylene copolymer
15.7
6
Polyvinylidene fluoride
10.2
6
Ethylene-chlorotrifluoroethylene
19.3
6
copolymer
Polychlorotrifluoroethylene
19.7
6
Extrusion Compounds for Low-Temperature Insulation
Polyvinyl chloride
Flexible
11.8-15.7
30
Rigid
13.8-19.7
30
Polyethylene
18.9
28
Polyethylene, low-density
21.7
6
300
31
Polyethylene, high-density
19.7
6
Polypropylene/polyethylene copolymer
23.6
6
Embedding Compounds
Basic epoxy resin:
19.7
6
bisphenol-A/epichlorohydrin
polycondensate
Cycloaliphatic epoxy: alicyclic
19.7
6
diepoxy carboxylate
Polyetherketone
18.9
30
Polyurethanes
Two-component, polyol-cured
25.4
6
Two-part solventless,
24.0
6
polybutylene-based
Silicones
Clear two-part heat curing eletrical
21.7
6
grade silicone embedding resin
Red insulating enamel (MIL-E-22118)
Dry
47.2
6
Wet
11.8
6
Enamels
Red enamel, fast cure
Standard conditions
78.7
6
Immersion conditions
47.2
6
Black enamel
Standard conditions
70.9
6
Immersion conditions
47.2
6
Varnishes
Vacuum-pressure impregnated baking
type solventless polyester varnish
Rigid, two-part
70.9
6
Semiflexible high-bond thixotropic
78.7
6
Rigid high-bond high-flash
68.9
6
freon-resistant
Baking type epoxy varnish
Solventless, rigid, low viscosity,
90.6
6
one-part
Solventless, semiflexible, one-part
82.7
6
Solventless, semirigid, chemical
106.3
6
resistant, low dielectric constant
Solvable, for hermetic electric motors
181.1
6
Polyurethane coating
Clear conformal, fast cure
Standard conditions
78.7
6
Immersion conditions
47.2
6
Insulating Films and Tapes
Low-density polyethylene film
300
31
(40 µm thick)
Poly-p-xylylene film
410-590
32
Aromatic polymer films
Kapton H (Du Pont)
389-430
33
Ultem (GE Plastic and Roem AG)
437-565
33
Hostaphan (Hoechst AG)
338-447
33
Amorphous Stabar K2000
404-422
33
(ICI film)
Stabar S100 (ICI film)
353-452
33
Polyetherimide film (26 µm)
486
34
Parylene N/D (poly-p-xylylene/poly-
dichloro-p-xylylene) 25 µm film
275
6
Cellulose acetate film
157
6
Cellulose triacetate film
157
6
Polytetrafluoroethylene film
87-173
6
Perfluoroalkoxy film
157-197
6
Fluorinated ethylene-propylene
197
6
copolymer film
Ethylene-tetrafluoroethylene film
197
6
Ethylene-chlorotrifluoroethylene
197
6
copolymer film
Polychlorotrifluoroethylene film
118-153.5
6
High-voltage rubber insulating tape
28
6
Composites
Isophthalic polyester (vinyl toluene
monomer) filled with
Calcium carbonate, CaCO3
15.0
38
Gypsum, CaSO4
14.4
38
Alumina trihydrate
15.4
38
Clay
14.4
38
BPA fumarate polyester (vinyl toluene
monomer) filled with
Calcium carbonate
6.1
38
Gypsum
5.9
38
Alumina trihydrate
11.8
38
Clay
12.6
38
Table 3
Dielectric Strength of Solids (continued)
Dielectric
strength
Material
kV/mm
Ref.
Dielectric
strength
Material
kV/mm
Ref.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2000 by CRC PRESS LLC 


--- PAGE 2479 ---
TeamLRN
FLAMMABILITY OF CHEMICAL SUBSTANCES
This table gives properties related to the flammability of about 900 chemical substances. The properties listed are:
tB : Normal boiling point in °C ( at 101.325 kPa pressure).
FP: Flash point, which is the minimum temperature at which the vapor pressure of a liquid is sufficient to form an ignitable mixture with air near the
surface of the liquid. Flash point is not an intrinsic physical property but depends on the conditions of measurement (see Reference 1).
Fl. Limits: Flammable limits (often called explosive limits), which specify the range of concentration of the vapor in air (in percent by volume) for
which a flame can propagate. Below the lower flammable limit, the gas mixture is too lean to burn; above the upper flammable limit, the mixture is
too rich. Values refer to ambient temperature and pressure and are dependent on the precise test conditions. A ? indicates that one of the limits is not
known.
IT: Ignition temperature (sometimes called autoignition temperature), which is the minimum temperature required for self-sustained combustion in
the absence of an external ignition source. As in the case of flash point, the value depends on specified test conditions.
Even in cases where very careful measurements of flash point have been replicated in several laboratories, observed values can differ by 3 to 6°C
(Reference 4). For more typical measurements, larger uncertainties should be assumed in both flash points and autoignition temperatures. The absence
of a flash point entry in this table does not mean that the substance is nonflammable, but only that no reliable value is available.
Compounds are listed by molecular formula following the Hill convention. Substances not containing carbon are listed first, followed by those
that contain carbon. To locate an organic compound by name or CAS Registry Number when the molecular formula is not known, use the table “Physical
Constants of Organic Compounds” in Section 3 and its indexes to determine the molecular formula.
REFERENCES
1.
Fire Protection Guide to Hazardous Materials, 11th Edition, National Fire Protection Association, Quincy, MA, 1994.
2.
Urben, P.G., Editor, Bretherick’s Handbook of Reactive Chemical Hazards, 5th Edition, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, 1995.
3.
Daubert, T.E., Danner, R.P., Sibul, H.M., and Stebbins, C.C., Physical and Thermodynamic Properties of Pure Compounds: Data Compilation,
extant 1994 (core with 4 supplements), Taylor & Francis, Bristol, PA.
4.
Report of Investigation: Flash Point Reference Materials, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Standard Reference Materials
Program, Gaithersburg, MD, 1995.
Mol. Form.
Name
tB/°C
FP/°C
Fl. Limits
IT/°C
Compounds not containing carbon
B2H6
Diborane
-92.4
-90
1-98%
≈40
B5H9
Pentaborane(9)
60
30
0.4-?
35
BrH3Si
Bromosilane
1.9
<0
≈20
Br3HSi
Tribromosilane
109
≈20
Cl2H2Si
Dichlorosilane
8.3
4.1-99%
36
Cl3HSi
Trichlorosilane
33
-50
104
GeH4
Germane
-88.1
≈20
Ge2H6
Digermane
29
≈50
H2
Hydrogen
-252.8
4-74%
H2S
Hydrogen sulfide
-59.55
4-44%
260
H2S2
Hydrogen disulfide
70.7
<22
H2Te
Hydrogen telluride
-2
-50
H3N
Ammonia
-33.33
16-25%
H3P
Phosphine
-87.75
1.8-?
H4N2
Hydrazine
113.55
38
5-100%
H4P2
Diphosphine
63.5
≈20
H4Si
Silane
-111.9
-112
1.4-?
≈20
H6Si2
Disilane
-14.3
-14
≈20
H8Si3
Trisilane
52.9
<0
≈20
P
Phosphorus (white)
280.5
38
Compounds containing carbon
CHN
Hydrogen cyanide
26
-18
6-40%
538
CH2Cl2
Dichloromethane
40
13-23%
556
CH2N2
Cyanamide
141
16-16
